

 

ABOUT THE AUTHOR  
 
The author of the 'Yatharth Geeta'  is a 
saint who is bereft of worldly education, 
yet is internally organized and integrated 
with divine intuition by the grace of an 
accomplished Guru, which became 
possible after a long practice of 
medita tion. He considers writing as an 
obstacle on the path to the Supreme 
Beatitude, yet his directions became the 
cause for this treatise. The Supreme 
Being had revealed to him that all his 
inherited mental dispositions have been 
nullified excepting a minor on e, the 
writing of 'Yatharth Geeta'. Initially he 
had tried his best to cut this disposition 
also, through meditation, but the 
directive prevailed. Thus the treatise, 
'Yatharth Geeta' became possible. 
Wherever mistakes crept into the 
treatise, the Supreme B eing himself 
rectified them. We bring forth this book 
with the wish that the Swami Ji's motto 
"internalized peace" would become 
"peace for everyone".  
 
- Publisher  

Science of Dharm for Mankind
|| Shreemadbhagwadgeeta ||
Yatharth Geeta
The Geeta in Its True Perspective
Compiled and Interpreted through the blessings of
Parampoojya Shree Paramhansji Maharaj
by
Swami Adgadanand Ji
Shree Paramhans Ashram
Shakteshgarh, Chunar-Rajgarh Road
Dist.- Mirzapur (U.P.), India
Publisher:
Shree Paramhans Swami Adgadanand Ji Ashram Trust
New Apolo State, Gala no.5, Mogra Lane (near railway sub-way)
Andheri (E), Mumbai ? 400 069. India
Yathartha Geeta English_28_09_2017.indd   1 28-Sep-17   4:09:42 PM

What were the inner feelings and emotions of Lord
Krishn when he taught the Geeta in intimate dialogue with
his friend and disciple Arjun? All inner feelings cannot beexpressed in words. Some can be told, some areexpressed through the body language, and the rest are tobe realized which can only be understood by a seekerthrough inner experiences. Only after attaining the statewhich Lord Krishn had been to, an accomplished teacherknows what the Geeta says. He simply does not reiterateverses of the Geeta but, in fact, gives expression to theinner feelings of the Geeta. This is possible because hesees the same picture which was there when Lord Krishntaught the Geeta. He therefore, sees the real meaning, canshow it to us, can evoke the inner feelings and would leadus on the path to enlightenment.
?Revered Shree Paramhans Parmanand Ji Maharaj?
was also an enlightened teacher of such a level and thecompilation of his words and blessings to grasp the innerfeelings of the Geeta itself is the ?Yatharth Geeta?.
- Swami Adgadanand
Yathartha Geeta English_28_09_2017.indd   3 28-Sep-17   4:09:43 PM

Yathartha Geeta English_28_09_2017.indd   5 28-Sep-17   4:09:43 PM

Dedicated
with profound reverence
to the holy memory of
the Immortal, Blessed, Supreme Yogi,
and the most exalted
Shree Swami Paramanand Ji
of
Shree Paramhans Ashram Ansuiya
(Chitrakoot)
Yathartha Geeta English_28_09_2017.indd   7 28-Sep-17   4:09:44 PM

GURU V ANDANA
(SALUTATIONS TO THE GURU)
|| Om Shree Sadguru Dev Bhagwan Ki Jai ||
Jai Sadgurudevam, Paramanandam,
amar shariram avikari I
Nirgun nirmulam, dhari sthulam,katan shulam bhav bhari II
Surat nij soham, kalimal khoham,
jan man mohan chhavi bhari IAmrapur vasi, sab sukh rashi,sada ekras nirvikari II
Anubhav gambhira, mati ke dhira,alakh fakira avatari IYogi advaishta, trikal drashta,
keval pad anandkari II
Chitrakutahi aayo, advait lakhayo,
anusuia asan mari IShree Paramhans Swami, antaryami,hain badnami sansari II
Hansan hitkari, jag pagudhari,garv prahari, upkari ISat-panth chalayo, bharam mitayo,roop lakhayo karatari II
Yeh shishy hai tero, karat nihoro,mo par hero prandhari IJai Sadguru.....bhari II
||  OM  ||
Yathartha Geeta English_28_09_2017.indd   8 28-Sep-17   4:09:44 PM

Yathartha Geeta English_28_09_2017.indd   9 28-Sep-17   4:09:44 PM

Shree Swami Adgadanand Ji
(Blessed Disciple of Paramhans Swami Shree Paramanand Ji Maharaj)
Yathartha Geeta English_28_09_2017.indd   11 28-Sep-17   4:09:45 PM

3-1-2001- {dídY_© g§gX _| {díd _mZd Y_©emó lr_X² ^JdX² JrVm Ho$ ^mî` `WmW© JrVm na na_ nyÁ` na_h§g
ñdm_r lr A?S>J?S>mZÝX Or _hmamO Or H$mo à`mJ Ho$ na_nmdZ nd© _hmHw$å^ Ho$ Adga na {dídJwé H$s
Cnm{Y go {d^y{fV {H$`m ?&
2-4-1998- _mZd_mÌ H$m Y_©emó lr_X² ^JdX² JrVm H$s {dewÕ ì`m»`m `WmW© JrVm Ho$ [bE Y_©g§gX Ûmam h[aÛma
_| _hmHw$å^ Ho$ Adga na AÝVam© r` A{YdoeZ _| na_nyÁ` ñdm_r lr A?S>J?S>mZÝX Or _hmamO H$mo ^maVJm¡ad Ho$ gå_mZ go {d^y{fV {H$`m J`m ?&
1-4-1998- ~rgdr eVmãXr Ho$ ApÝV_ _hmHw å^ Ho$ Adga na h[aÛma Ho$ g_ñV e§H$amMm`m} _hm_ÊS>boídamo ~«m÷U
_hmg^m Am¡a 44 Xoem| Ho$ Y_©erb {dÛmZm| H$s CnpñW{V _| {díd Y_© g§gX Ûmam AÝVam© r` A{YdoeZ _|
nyÁ` ñdm_r Or H$mo lr_X² ^JdX² JrVm Y_©emó (^mî` `WmW© JrVm) Ho$ Ûmam {díd Ho$ {dH$mg _| A{ÛVr``moJXmZ hoVw {d?Jm¡ad gå_mZ àXmZ {H$`m J`m?&??
??
??
??ï?
ï?lr h[a H r dmUr
drVamJ na_h§gm| H m AmYma
Am[Xemò JrVm- g§V _V
10-2-2007- V¥Vr` {díd{hÝX y gå_obZ {XZm§H$ 10-11-12-13 \$adar 2007 Ho$ Adga na AY©Hw$å^ 2007 à`mJ ^maV _|
àdmgr Ed§ Aàdmgr ^maVr`m| Ho$ {díd gå_obZ Ho$ CX²KmQ>Z Ho$ Adga na {díd {hÝXw n[afX Zo ½`mahdr
Y_©g§gX _| nmarV JrVm h_mam Y_©emó h¡ àñVmd Ho$ n[aàoú` _| JrVm H$mo gX¡d go {dÚ_mZ ^maV H$m JwéJ«ÝWH$hVo hþE `WmW© JrVm H$mo BgH$m emídV ^mî` CX²Kmo{fV {H$`m VWm BgHo$ AÝVam© r` _mZd Y_©emó H$sCn`mo{JVm aIZo dmbm emó H$hm ?&ï?
1-3-2005- ^maV H$s gdm}ƒ lr H$mer {dÛVn[afX Zo {XZm§H$ 1-3-2004 H$mo lr_X² ^JdX² JrVm H$mo Am{X _Zwñ_¥{V
VWm doXm| H$mo Bgr H$m {dñVma _mZVo hþE {díd_mZd H$m Y_©emó Am¡a `WmW© JrVm H$mo n[a^mfm Ho$ n _|ñdrH$ma {H$`m Am¡a `h CX²Kmo{fV {H$`m {H$ Y_© Am¡a Y_©emó An[adV©Zerb hmoZo go Am{XH$mb go Y_©emó
lr_X² ^JdX² JrVm hr ahr h¡ ?&??
??ê
Yathartha Geeta English_28_09_2017.indd   13 28-Sep-17   4:09:45 PM

_mZZr` CƒÝ`m`mb` Bbmhm~mX Zo$ [aQ> `m{MH$m g§»`m 56447 gZ 2003 í`m_ba§OZ
_wIOu dZm_ {Z_©ba§OZ _wIOu Ed§ AÝ` Ho$ àH$aU _| AnZo {ZU©` {XZm§H$ 30 AJñV
2007 H$mo lr_X² ^JdX² JrVm H$mo g_ñV {díd H$m Y_©emó _mZVo hþE amï?r` Y_©emó
H$s _mÝ`Vm XoZo H$s g§ñVþ{V H$s h¡ ?& AnZo {ZU©` Ho$ n«ñVa 115 go 123 _| _mZZr` Ý`m`mb`
Zo {d{^Þ JrVm ^mî`m| na {dMma H$aVo hþE `WmW© JrVm H$mo BgHo$ gå`H$ Ed§ `wJmZwHw$b
^mî` Ho$ én _| _mÝ` H$aVo hwE Y_©, H$_©, `k, `moJ Am{X H$mo n[a^mfm Ho$ AmYma na BgoOm{V nm{V _Oh~ gåàXm` Xoe d H$mb go nao _mZd_mÌ H$m Y_©emó _mZm {OgHo$ _mÜ`_go bm¡{H$H$ d nmabm¡{H$H$ XmoZm| g_¥{Õ H$m _mJ© àeñV {H$`m Om gH$Vm h¡ &
ZmoQ> - Cnamoº$ {ZU©` _mZZr` Cƒ Ý`m`mb` B©bmhm~mX H$s ~odgmB©Q> na CnbãY h¡ &??ekuuh; mPp U;k;ky; bykgkckn dk ,sfrgkfld fu.kZ;
Hon'ble Mr. Justice S.N. Srivastava, (in his judgment dated
30.8.2007 passed in writ petition No. 56447 of 2003 Shyamal Ranjan
Mukherjee Vs. Nirmal Ranjan Mukherjee & others) has been pleased to hold
that:
?Shrimadbhagwad Gita is a Dharmshastra not only for Hindu but for
all human beings. Message of Gita is relevant for all Religions of the world
and is not limited for any particular Religion?.
?Y atharth Geeta? by Swami Adgadanandji Maharaj, a great saint of
India,is Dharm and Dharmshastra for all, irrespective of their caste, creed,
race, religion, Dharm & community and is for all times and space.
N.B.:- The aforesaid decision is available on the Website:
http://www.allahabadhighcourt.inExtract from Historical Judgment of Hon'ble High Court,
Allahabad
Yathartha Geeta English_28_09_2017.indd   15 28-Sep-17   4:09:45 PM

THE GEETA IS A SACRED WRIT OF THE WHOLE OF HUMANITY
Shree Maharshi Ved Vyas- Lord Krishn Era
Before the advent of Maharshi Ved Vyas, approximately 5200
years ago, no text of any pedagogical discipline was available in the
text form. Departing from this tradition of oral and perceiving words of
wisdom and knowledge, he compiled the antecedent physical as wellas spiritual knowledge in the textual form of four Ved, Brahmasutr,Mahabharat, Bhagwad and Geeta and proclaimed that,
ieerlee megieerlee keâle&JÙee efkeâcevÙew: Mee?emeb«enw:~ ~
Ùee  mJeÙeb  he©eveeYemÙe  cegKehe©eeefÉefve:me=lee~~
gÍtÂ sugÍtÂ kartavyÂ kimanyaiÉ ïÂstrasaßgrahaiÉ |
yÂ svayaØ padmanÂbhasya mukhapadmÂdviniÉsçtÂ ||
?Gopal Krishn has condensed the conclusion of all the Upanishad
in the Geeta to enable humanity to alleviate itself from pangs of sorrow.??
The Heart of all Ved and the essence of all the Upanishad is the
Geeta, which was elicited by Lord Krishn and provided sustenance to
distraught humanity of a reasoned doctrine and approach to perceive
the Supreme Being. This has endowed humanity with the ultimate meansof Peace. The sage, from among all his works, earmarked the Geeta asthe treatise of knowledge and remarked that, the Geeta is suitable forbeing earnestly taken as the driving philosophy of one?s activities oflife. When we have the treatise given to us which was uttered by Lord
Krishn himself, why ever would we need to store other scriptures?
The essence of the Geeta is explicitly clarified by the verse:
Skebâ Mee?eb osJekeâerheg$e ieerleced
Skeâes osJees osJekeâerheg$e SJe~
Skeâes ceb$emlemÙe veeceeefve Ùeeefve
keâcee&hÙeskebâ lemÙe osJemÙe mesJee~~
ekaØ ïÂstraØ devakiputra gÍtam
eko devo devakiputra eva |
eko maßtrastasya nÂmÂni yÂni
karmÂpyekaØ tasya devasya sevÂ ||

Meaning there is only one holy writ which had been recited by
Lord Krishn, the son of Devaki. There is only one spiritual entity worth
emulating and the truth which has been specified in that commentary is- the Soul. There is nothing immortal other than the Soul. What chant
has been advised by that Yogeshwar in the Geeta? ?Om??. ?Arjun! Om
is the name of the eternal Supreme Being. Chant Om and meditateupon me.?? There is only one Dharm - ordained action - to serve theSupreme Being described in the Geeta. Place him in your heart withreverence. Therefore, the Geeta has remained our scripture since thebeginning.
After Lord Krishn, the holy sages too who have described the
divine creator as the Universal truth over the thousands years aremessengers of the Geeta. That one may express their corporeal aswell as eternal desires from God, be awed by the God and not believe inother deities- has already been proclaimed by many sages, but only theGeeta explicitly shows the way to attain spirituality and fathom the
distance on the way of attaining it. The Geeta not only gives spiritual
peace, it also makes it easier to attain eternal and enduring alleviation.In order to perceive it please refer to the universally acclaimedcommentary of Bhagwadgeeta named as ?Yatharth Geeta??.
Although the Geeta is universally acclaimed, it has not been
able to take the place of doctrine or literature of any religion or sect,
because religious sects are always clinched by one or the other dictum
or dogma. The Geeta revealed in India is a legacy of the UniversalWisdom. The Geeta is the ethereal heritage of India, the spiritual country.As such, it should be treated as national literature-an effort that may bedirected at alleviating humanity from the pathos of the tradition of classdiscrimination, conflicts and altercation and accord peace.
||  OM  ||

UNIFORM DHARM PRINCIPLES
1. EVERYONE IS CHILD OF GOD:
?The immortal soul in the body is a part of mine and it is HE
who draws the five senses and the sixth - the mind - that dwell in
nature.?  (Geeta, 15/7)
All human beings are children of God.
2. PURPOSE OF THE HUMAN BODY:
?It hardly needs saying that since pious Brahmin and royal
sages (rajarshi) attain to salvation, you should always engage inmy worship after getting the rare human body which is naturallyafflicted with pain and suffering and is ephemeral too.?
(Geeta, 9/33)
The right for such worship is granted to all those in a human
body.
3. ONLY TWO KINDS OF HUMAN BEINGS:
?There are in the world, O Parth, two kinds of beings, the
pious, on whom I have already dwelt at length, and the devilish ofwhom you will now hear from me.?  (Geeta, 16/6)
There are only two types of human beings, the ?Dev? (divine)
of whom the heart is dominated by the noble traits, and the ?Asur?(devil) whose evil traits dominate the hearts. In this entire creation,there are no other types of human beings.
4. FULFILMENT OF EVERY DESIRE THROUGH GOD:
?Men who do pious deeds enjoined by the three Ved, who
have tasted nectar and freed themselves from sin, and who wishfor heavenly existence through worshiping me by Yagya, go toheaven (Indrlok), and enjoy godly pleasures as a reward for theirvirtuous acts.?  (Geeta, 9/20)
?Through worshiping me, people aspire to reach the heaven
and I grant it to them.? Therefore, everything can be easily attainedthrough the grace of Supreme Being.

5. ELIMINATION OF EVERY SIN BY TAKING REFUGE IN
THE SUPREME BEING:
?Even if you are the most heinous sinner, the ark of knowledge
will carry you safely across all evils.? (Geeta, 4/36)
Even the worst of all sinners can undoubtedly gain access to
the Supreme Being by using the boat of wisdom.
6. KNOWLEDGE:
?Constantly resting in the awareness of Soul is called adhyatm
and perception of the Supreme Spirit who is the end of realization
of truth are all knowledge and whatever is contrary to them isignorance.? (Geeta, 13/11)
Dedication to the wisdom of the Supreme Soul, and the direct
perception of Eternal Wisdom, which is the manifestation of theSupreme Soul, constitute the components of the real wisdom.Anything, other than these is ignorance. Thus direct perception ofGod is wisdom.
7. EVERYONE IS ENTITLED TO WORSHIP:
?Even if a man of the most depraved conduct worships me
incessantly, he is worthy of being regarded as a saint because heis a man of true resolve. Thus he soon grows pious and achieveseternal peace, and so, O son of Kunti, you should know beyondany doubt that my worshiper is never destroyed.? (Geeta, 9/30-31)
A great sinner even, if worships ME with one-pointedness
and single mindedness shall be transformed into a noble soul andshall attain the everlasting peace within. Therefore, a noble soul isthe one who has dedicated himself to the Supreme Being.
8. EVERLASTING SEED IN DIVINE PATH:
?Since selfless action neither wears out the seed from which
it sprang nor has any adverse consequence, even a partialobservance of this dharm liberates (one) from the dire terror (ofrepeated birth and death).? (Geeta, 2/40)
Even a small amount of action performed with a goal of self
realization shall elevate the seeker from the terrible fear of birth

and death cycles. The seed that is sown in the divine path is
never lost.
9. THE ABODE OF THE SUPREME BEING:
?Propelling all living things that bestride a body which is but a
contrivance by his maya, O Arjun, God abides in the hearts of allbeings. Seek refuge with all your heart, O Bharat, in that God bywhose grace you will attain to repose and the everlasting, ultimatebliss.? (Geeta, 18/61-62)
God resides within the heart of every living being. Therefore,
one must surrender himself totally to this Supreme Being withcomplete detachment. Through His compassion, one shall attainthe ultimate bliss.
10. YAGYA:
?Yet other Yogi offer the functions of their senses and
operations of their life breaths to the fire of Yog (self control) kindledby knowledge. As some offer their exhalation to inhalation, othersoffer their inhaled breath to the exhaled breath, while yet otherspractice serenity of breath by regulating their incoming and outgoingbreath.? (Geeta, 4/27, 4/29)
The entire activities of the sense organs and mental turmoils
are offered as oblations to the soul that is illuminated by wisdom,into the fire of yog. Meditators, on the self, sacrifice the vital air toApan and similarly Apan to Pran. Going even higher than this, aYogi restrains all life forces and takes refuge in the regulation ofbreath (Pranayam). The procedure of such practices is Yagya. Toperform this action is ?ORDAINED ACTION? i.e. Karm.
11. KARM:
?Many such yagya are laid down by the Ved but they all
germinate and grow from the ordained action, and performing theirvarious steps you will be free from worldly bondage.? 
(Geeta, 4/32)
The sacrifice of the vital air to Apan and similarly Apan to
Pran and the restraint of inhalation and exhalation of breath isnamed as Karm. Karm signifies worship or contemplation. Thesystem of practice of Yog is known as Yagya.

VIKARM:
?It is essential to know the nature of action as well as of
actionlessness, and also that of meritorious action, for the ways
of action are (so) inscrutable.?  (Geeta, 4/17)
Vikarm means that karm which is not obligatory but which is
undertaken for the help and guidance of those who are left behind.After the final attainment, the sage becomes free from theperformance of karm. Such self-attained, self-realised sages neithergain nor lose anything by performing the karm. After the attainmentof this state whatever they do is immaculate. Such a karm iscalled vikarm.
12. PERFORMER OF YAGYA:
?O the best of Kuru, the yogi who have tasted the nectar
flowing from Yagya attain to the eternal Supreme God, but howcan the next life of people bereft of Yagya be happy, when eventheir life in this world is miserable?? (Geeta, 4/31)
For people who do not possess the attitude of yagya, it is
very difficult to obtain human form in the transmigratory existence.Therefore, everyone in a human body is entitled to performWorshipful Meditation (Yagya).
13. GOD CAN BE SEEN:
?O Arjun! A man of great penance, a worshiper can know this
form of mine directly, acquire its essence, and even become onewith it by a total and unswerving dedication.? (Geeta, 11/54)
It is easy to see Him face to face, know Him and even gain
entry into Him through intense devotion.
     ?Only a seer views the soul as a marvel, another one describes
him as a marvel, and yet another hears him as a marvel, whilethere are some who hear him and yet know Him not.?
(Geeta, 2/29)
An enlightened sage could see this SOUL as a rare wonder.
This is direct perception.

14. SOUL IS ETERNAL AND TRUE:
?The Self, which cannot be pierced or burnt or made wet or
faded, is uninterrupted, all pervasive, constant, immovable and
eternal.? (Geeta, 2/24)
Soul alone is true. Soul alone is eternal.
15. BRAHMA (god of creation) AND HIS CREATIONS ARE
MORTAL:
?All the worlds from Brahmlok downwards are, O Arjun, of a
recurrent character, but, O son of Kunti, the soul which realizesme is not born again.? (Geeta, 8/16)
Brahma and his creations, dev (gods) and demons are full of
grief, momentary and mortal.
16. WORSHIP OF OTHER DEITIES:
?Driven by the properties of their nature, they who fall from
knowledge desire worldly pleasures and in imitation of the prevailingcustoms, worship other gods instead of the one single God.?
(Geeta, 7/20)
Those whose intellect has been robbed through enjoyment of
worldly comforts, such foolish persons tend to worship other godsthan the Supreme Being.
?Although even covetous devotees indeed worship me in
worshiping other gods, their worship is against the ordainedprovisions and therefore enveloped by ignorance.? (Geeta, 9/23)
Those who worship other gods, are worshiping the Supreme
Being under the influence of ignorance and their efforts go in vain.
RELINQUISHMENT OF SCRIPTURAL PROCESS-
?While the virtuous worship gods and the impassioned and
morally blind worship yaksh and demons, they who are blinded byignorance worship ghosts and nature-spirits.?? (Geeta, 17/4)
Those who are of sattvic nature worship gods when they quit
the scriptural path; persons of rajas nature worship yaksha,rakshas, and persons of tamas nature worship ghosts and goblins.

?Mark you that they who undergo terrible self mortification
without spiritual sanction and are afflicted with hypocrisy and
arrogance besides lust, attachment, and vanity of power and whowear out not only the elements that form their bodies but also mewho dwells in their souls, are ignorant men with evil disposition.?(Geeta, 17/5-6)
Even people with virtuousness tend to worship other gods.
However, you must know that such persons too are devilish innature.
17. THE IGNOBLE:
?I forever condemn these abhorring, degraded, and cruel
persons, the most abject, among mankind, to demoniacal births.??
(Geeta, 16/19)
Those who, after forsaking the prescribed way of performing
Yagya, adopt ways without scriptural sanction, are cruel, sinfuland ignoble among the human beings.
18. ORDAINED PROCEDURE:
?He who departs from the body intoning OM, which is GOD in
a word, and remembering me, attains to salvation.?? (Geeta, 8/13)
The intoning of OM, which is the synonym for eternal Brahm
and remembering only the sole Supreme Being in worshipfulmeditation is the guidance of the enlightened sage.
19. SCRIPTURE:
?I have thus instructed you, O the sinless, in the most subtle
of all knowledge because, O Bharat, by knowing its essence aman gains wisdom and accomplishes all his tasks.??
(Geeta, 15/20)
GEETA IS SCRIPTURE:
?So scripture is the authority on what ought and ought not to
be done, and having learnt that you have the ability to act accordingto the provisions laid down by the scripture.?? (Geeta, 16/24)

Scripture is only a base to take perfect decision in case of
performance or avoidance of DUTY. Hence one should act as per
the prescribed tasks elaborated in the GEETA.
20. DHARM:
?Grieve not, for I shall free you from all sins if you abandon all
other obligations (dharm) and seek refuge in me alone.??
(Geeta, 18/66)
After giving up all the confusing ups and downs, and
interpretations (he who shall take refuge in ME, means who shallcompletely surrender to the sole Supreme Being), the ordainedaction to achieve ultimate bliss is the real conduct of DHARM(Geeta, 2/40) and even if a man of the most depraved conduct ifperforms the ordained action, he is worthy of being regarded as asaint. (Geeta, 9/30)
21. WHOM TO APPROACH TO KNOW REAL DHARM:
?For I am the one in which the eternal GOD, immortal life, the
imperishable Dharm, and the ultimate bliss all abide.??
(Geeta, 14/27)
?He is the dwelling of the immortal GOD, of everlasting life, of
eternal DHARM and of the unblemished pure joy of attaining theSupreme Goal.?? In other words, a GOD-attained saint, anenlightened sage, a GURU is this bliss, personified.
Note: THE TRUE ESSENCE OF ALL THE PATHS WORLDWIDE AREECHOS OF THE GEETA.

DIVINE MESSAGES PROCLAIMED BY
THE HOLY SAINTS, SINCE PRIMEVAL TIMES TILL
DATE, NOTED IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER
Swami Shree Adgadanand Ji has set up a plaque inscribed in form of this table
at the entrance gate of the Ashram during his stay, on the auspicious day of Ganga
Dashehara (1993) at Shree Paramhans Ashram Jagatanand, Village and P.O. Bareini,
Kachhava, Dist. Mirzapur (U.P.)
INDIA: A SPIRITUAL TEACHER FOR THE WORLD
-- The Seed Scripture of Creation
Lord Krishn has taught: 'imam vivasvate yogam'  (Geeta, 4/1) that
it was he who at the beginning, imparted the knowledge to the Sun,
from whom it was passed on to primeval Manu. Hence the Geetaonly is the primordial scripture. As per the Geeta, God alone is theultimate reality, the supreme essence of all, and he is pervadingand inherent in every particle of the world. He is accessible fordirect perception, attainment and can be realized through the spiritual
austerity of yog. This primordial knowledge revealed by God himself
is incessantly continuing to exist from the period of vedic exaltedsages till today.
-- Revered Vedic Sages (Primeval Age - Ved (Narayan Sukt)
The Supreme Being present in each particle in the universe is butthe only truth. The only way to attain emancipation is to realize
Him.
-- Bhagwan Shree Ram (Treta : Millions of years ago- Ramayan)
Aspirant of benediction without praying to the Supreme Being is an
ignorant person.
-- Yogeshwar Shree Krishn (5200 years ago - Geeta. Re-teaching
of Dharm)The God is the only truth. Achievement of that eternal God is possible
only through contemplation. Worshiping of deities is only done by
the ignorant.
-- Revered Sage Moosa (3000 years ago - Bible Old Testament)
As you revoked your faith (Shraddha) from the God, made idols-
He is unhappy. Begin praying to him.

-- Revered Sage Zarathustra (2700 years ago - Avesta)
Contemplate upon Ahura Mazda (God) to eradicate the evils
inhibiting your heart, which are the root causes of all the sorrows.
-- Revered Sage Mahavir (2600 years ago - Sutrgranth)
Only the Self is real; By observance of austere penance it could berealized in this same birth itself.
-- Revered Gautam Buddha (2500 years ago- Tripitika)
I have attained that sublime ultimate stage, which was attained bythe earlier saints. This is Nirvan.
-- Revered Jesus Christ (2000 years ago - Bible New Testament)
God can be attained by prayers. Come to me or an accomplishedsage (Sadguru) just because you would be called the son of the
God.
-- Revered Hajrat Mohammed Saheb (1400 years ago - Koran)
?La III- Allah Muhammad-ur Rasul-Allah?- There is none worthy of
worshiping other than the all- pervading God. Hajrat MohammedSaheb is messenger of God.
-- Revered Aadi Shankaracharya (1200 years ago)
The world is an illusion. In it, the only truth is the God and Hisname.
-- Revered Sage Kabir (600 years ago)
The name of Ram is ultimate, all else is futile. From The beginning,till end and in all the ages, the only struggle is with the Ram.Struggle with Ram, that only is salutary.
-- Revered Guru Nanak (500 years ago)
?Ek Omkar Satguru Prasadi? Only an Omkar is true, but it ispleasance of grace of an enlightened sage (Sadguru).
-- Revered Swami Dayanand Saraswati (200 years ago)
Worship only to the everlasting, immortal and eternal single God.The cardinal name of this Supreme Power is OM.
-- Revered Swami Shree Paramanand Ji (1912 - 1969 A.D.)
When the God bestows benevolence, the enemies turn as friendsand adversity becomes asset. The God is omnipresent.
||  OM  ||

CONTENTS
A Humble Appeal
Preface i-xvi
Chapter 1 The Yog of Irres olution and Grief ........................ 1-34
Chapter 2 Curiosity A bout Action ..................................... 35-88
Chapter 3 Ur ging the Enemy?s Destruction ....................... 89-122
Chapter 4 Eluc idation of The Deed of Yagya ................... 123-162
Chapter 5 The Supreme God- E njoyer of Yagya .............. 163-180
Chapter 6 The Yog of M editation ................................... 181-208
Chapter 7 Immac ulate knowledge ................................... 209-226
Chapter 8 Yog with The Imperis hable God ..................... 227-246
Chapter 9 Stirr ing to Spiritual Enlightenment .................. 247-270
Chapter 10 An Account of God?s Glory ............................ 271-292
Chapter 11 Rev elation of The Omnipresent ....................... 293-320
Chapter 12 The Yog of Devot ion ..................................... 321-330
Chapter 13 The S phere of Action and its Knower .............. 331-346
Chapter 14 Divis ion of the Three Properties ..................... 347-358
Chapter 15 The Yog of The Supreme Being ..................... 359-372
Chapter 16 The Yog of T elling The Divine
from the Demoniacal ...................................... 373-384
Chapter 17 The Yog of Threef old Faith ............................ 385-400
Chapter 18 The Yog of Renunciation ................................. 401-440
Summary ...................................................... 441-472
||  OM  ||

A HUMBLE APPEAL
Since quite a good number of Sanskrit words had to be included
in the English rendering of ?Yatharth Geeta? it is useful to explain briefly
why and how they have been used:
i)To take some more prominent examples, words such as dharm,
yog, yagya, sanskar, varn, sattwa, rajas, tamas, varnsankar, karm,
kshetra, kshetragya, and pranayam, which occur through the whole
book, are really untranslatable into English. Dharm, for instance, isnot ?religion?; and karm is something more than ?action?. Despite
this, however, approximate English equivalents have been used
wherever possible, but only, of course, if they do not distort ormisrepresent the original meaning. So ?action?, ?property?, and
?sphere? have been used for karm, varn, and kshetr respectively.
Approximate English equivalents have also been used for sattwa,rajas, and tamas, taking care that they do not obstruct the flow or
rhythm of language. But it was not found possible to have English
substitutes for dharm, yog, yagya, sanskar, and varnsankar, andthese words as well as many others have been used as they are.
But since the meaning of all Sanskrit words used in the rendering
(whether with or without English equivalents) is fully clarified in thetext itself, readers who have no familiarity with Sanskrit or Hindi
will find no difficulty in comprehending them. The main object in
this translation has been to use the unavoidable Sanskrit words ortheir English substitutes in such a way that they do not look like
patchwork and obstruct reading in any way.
ii)As for the English transcription of these Sanskrit words, normal
English alphabet has been used. So 
mebmkeâej  has been transcribed as
sanskar (that is how the word is spoken) rather than as sanskara;and 
Ùe%e as yagya (that is how it is pronounced) rather than as yajna.
The same principle of transcribing Sanskrit words in normal English
alphabet with a close proximity to the way these words are actually
spoken has been followed throughout the book. I believe that thisway makes for easier, smoother reading.

iii)Without meaning any offence to other scholarly writers, in deference
to the same principle of transcribing Sanskrit words in the normal
English alphabet with a close proximity to their actual pronunciationI have also dispensed with the practice of adding an ?a? to the last
pure consonants of English transcripts of Sanskrit words. So I have
transcribed 
ke=â<Ce as Krishn instead of Krishna, Depeg&ve as Arjun instead
of Arjuna, ceneYeejle  as Mahabharat instead of Mahabharata, Ùeesie as
yog instead of yoga, Oece& as dharm instead of dharma, keâce& as karm
instead of karma, and so on. The argument that the sound of theultimate pure consonant is incomplete unless an ?a? is added to it is
untenable, for had this been the case, the entire system of spelling
in English would have to be changed. If the last ?m? in ?farm? is acomplete consonant sound, why should dharm be transcribed as
dharma? Keeping this in view, one cannot but conclude that people
who have acted upon the illogical premise have done a singulardisservice to Sanskrit (their own language) by introducing a system
of transcription that has led to the distortion of the pronunciation of
such a large number of commonly used words. So, whatever bethe assumption behind the practice of adding an ?a? to the ultimate
pure consonant of Sanskrit/Indian words in their English
transcription, in actual practice this ?appendix? is treated as a fullvowel with the sound of ?a? as in ?father? or ?rather? or ?bath? rather
than as a part of the consonant itself.
iv)Just because Sanskrit or Hindi words are transcribed in English
alphabet they do not become English. So application of the usual
English practice of using an ?s? to make plurals to these words is
improper. The plural of karm is karm, not karms. The plural of vedis ved, not veds. So ?s? has not been used to make plurals of
Sanskrit nouns in this translation.
- One of Swami Ji?s disciples

Preface i
PREFACE
It appears that there is no need of any further exposition of the
Geeta. Hundreds of commentaries, out of which more than fifty are in
Sanskrit, have been attempted so far. But, although there are scores of
interpretations, they have a common basis- the Geeta, which is only
one. Why, then one may wonder, are there all these divergent opinionsand controversies when Yogeshwar Krishn?s message must of necessity
have been only one? The proclaimer verily speaks of truth that is only
one, but if there are ten listeners they construe his meaning in tendifferent ways. Our grasp of what has been said is determined by the
extent to which we are under the domination of one of the three properties
of nature, namely, sattwa (moral virtue and goodness), rajas (passionand moral blindness), and tamas (ignorance and darkness). We cannot
comprehend beyond the limitations imposed by these properties. So it
is logical that there should be all these disputes about the import of theGeeta-?The Lord?s Song?.
Men fall prey to doubts, not only because many different views
are held on a given subject, but also because of the fact that the sameprinciple is often enunciated in different ways and styles at differenttimes. Quite a good many existing commentaries on the Geeta are
touched by the current of truth, and yet if one of them-even a just and
correct interpretation-is placed among a thousand other interpretationsit is almost impossible to recognize it for what it is. Identification of
truth is an onerous task, for even falsehood wears the ?brows? of truth.
The many expositions of the Geeta all profess that they represent trutheven though they may not have any inkling of it. As against this, even
when quite a good many interpreters did succeed in coming by this
truth, for a number of reasons they were prevented from giving a publicutterance to it.
The much too common inability to get at the meaning of the Geeta
in its true perspective may be attributed to the fact that Lord Krishn wasa yogi, an enlightened sage. Only another great and accomplished Soul-

Yatharth Geeta ii
man of knowledge and discernment-who has gradually attained to the
ultimate spiritual goal discoursed upon by Lord Krishn can realize and
reveal the real intent of the Yogeshwar when he preached to his friend
and disciple Arjun. What is within one?s mind cannot be fully expressedby mere words. While some of it is communicated by facial expression
and gestures, and even by what is named ?eloquent? silence, the rest
that is still unexpressed is something dynamic and seekers can know it
only thro ugh action and by actually traversing the path of quest. So only
another sage who has himself trodden the path and arrived at Lord Kris hn?s
sublime state may know what the message of the Geeta really is. Ratherthan just reproducing lines from the scripture, he can know and
demonstrate its intent and significance, for Lord Krishn?s insights and
perceptions are also his insights and perceptions. Since he is a seerhimself, he cannot only show the essence but also awaken it in others,
and even prompt and enable them to embark on the way that leads to it.
My noble teacher-preceptor, the most Revered Paramhans
Parmanand Ji Maharaj, was a sage of such achievement; and ?Yatharth
Geeta? is nothing but a compilation of the meaning that was derived by
the author from his teacher?s utterances and inner promptings. Nothing
that you will find in this exposition belongs to me. And this meaning, asthe reader is about to see, embodies a dynamic, action-oriented principle
that has to be undertaken and personally gone through by everyone
who has taken to the path of spiritual seeking and accomplishment. Solong as he is removed from it, he has evidently not set upon the way of
worship and meditation but is yet roaming about amidst the maze of
certain lifeless stereotypes. So we have to take refuge in a sage-a Soulof the highest attainment, for this is what Lord Krishn has commended.
He explicitly admits that the truth he is about to illumine has also been
known to and celebrated by other sages. Not once does he profess thatonly he is aware of this truth or that only he can reveal it. On the contrary
he exhorts worshipers to seek haven under a seer and imbibe knowledge
from him by an innocent, guileless ministering to his needs. So LordKrishn has but proclaimed the verities that have also been discovered
and witnessed to by other sages of true accomplishment.

Preface iii
The Sanskrit in which the Geeta is embodied and set forth is so
simple and lucid. If we but make a patient and careful perusal of its
syntax and the etymology of its words, we can understand most of the
Geeta by ourselves. But the difficulty is that we are disinclined to acceptwhat these words really signify. To cite an instance, Lord Krishn has
declared in unambiguous terms that true action is the undertaking of
yagya. But we yet persist in asserting that all the worldly business inwhich men are engaged is action. Throwing light upon the nature of
yagya, Lord Krishn says that while many yogi undertake it by offering
pran (inhaled breath) to apan (exhaled breath), and many sacrifice apanto pran, yet many others regulate both pran and apan to achieve perfect
serenity of breath (pranayam). Many sages resign the inclination of
their senses to the sacred fire of self-restraint. Thus yagya is said to becontemplation of breath of pran and apan. This is what the composer of
the Geeta has recorded. Despite this, however, we adamantly hold that
intoning swaha and casting of barley grains, oil seeds, and butter intothe altar-fire is yagya. Nothing like this has been even suggested byYogeshwar Krishn.
How to account for this all too common failure to comprehend the
true meaning of the Geeta? Even after a great deal of hair-splitting andcramming, all that we succeed in getting hold of, is nothing more than
the external framework of its syntactical order. Why perforce, we should
find out, do we find ourselves deprived of truth? As a matter of fact,with his birth and growing up a man inherits the paternal legacy of home,
shop, land and property, rank and honour, cattle and other livestock,
and now-a-days even machinery and appliances. Precisely in the sameway he also inherits certain customs, traditions, and modes of worship:
the evil legacy of all the three hundred and thirty million Hindu gods and
goddesses who were identified and catalogued long ago as well as ofinnumerable various forms of them all over the world. As a child grows
up, he observes his parents?, his brothers? and sisters?, and, his
neighbours? way of worship. His family?s beliefs, rites, and ceremoniesare thus permanently imprinted on his mind. If his heritage is worship of
a goddess, all his life he recites only the name of that goddess. If his

Yatharth Geeta iv
patrimony is worship of ghosts and spirits, he cannot but endlessly
repeat the names of those ghosts and spirits. So it is that while someof us adhere to Shiv, some others cleave to Lord Krishn, and yet otherscling to this or that deity. It is beyond us to forsake them.
If such misguided men ever get a propitious, sacred work like the
Geeta, they fail to grasp its real import. It is possible for a man to giveup the material possessions he has inherited, but he cannot rid himself
of inherited traditions and creeds. He can relinquish material belongings
that are his legacy and go far away from them, but even there he isdoggedly pursued by the thoughts, beliefs, and usages that have been
ineradicably engraved on his mind and heart. He cannot after all cut off
his head. It is for this reason that we also construe the truth containedin the Geeta in the light of our inherited assumptions, customs, and
modes of worship. If the scripture is in harmony with them and there is
no contradiction between the two, we concede its veracity. But we eitherreject it or twist it to suit our convenience if this is not the case. Is it
surprising then that more often than not we miserably fail to comprehend
the mysterious knowledge of the Geeta? So this secret continues toremain inscrutable. Sages and noble teacher-preceptors, who have
known the Self as well as his kinship with the Supreme Spirit, are on
the other hand knowers of the truth that the Geeta embodies. Only theyare qualified to say what the Geeta proclaims. For others, however, it
remains a secret which they can best resolve by sitting devotedly as
earnest disciples near some sage of awareness. This way of realizationhas been repeatedly emphasized by Lord Krishn.
The Geeta is not a holy book that belongs to any one individual,
caste, group, school, sect, nation or time. It is rather a scripture for theentire world and for all times. It is for all, for every nation, for every
race, and for every man and woman, whatever be their spiritual level
and capacity. Irrespective of this, however, just hearsay or someone?sinfluence should not be the basis for a decision that has a direct bearing
upon one?s existence. Lord Krishn says in the last chapter of the Geeta
that even just hearing its mysterious knowledge is indeed salutary. Butafter a seeker has thus learnt it from an accomplished teacher, he also

Preface v
needs to practise it and incorporate it into his own conduct and
experience. This necessitates that we approach the Geeta after freeing
ourselves from all prejudices and preconceived notions. And then we
will indeed find it a pillar of light.
To regard the Geeta as just a sacred book is not enough. A book
is at best a sign-post that guides readers to knowledge. It is said thatone who has known the truth of the Geeta is a knower of the Ved-whichliterally means knowledge of God. In the Upanishad Brihadaranyak,
Yagnvalkya calls the Ved ?the breath of the Eternal.? But all the
knowledge and all the wisdom that the Geeta embodies, we must alwaysremember, comes to consciousness only within the worshiper?s heart.
The great sage Vishwamitr, we are told, was absorbed in meditative
penance. Pleased with this, Brahma appeared and-said to him, ?Fromthis day you are a sage (rishi).? But not satisfied with this, the hermit
went on with his intent contemplation. After a while Brahma, now
accompanied by other gods, returned and said, ?From today you are aroyal sage (rajarshi).? But since Vishwamitr?s wish was yet unfulfilled,
he continued with his incessant penance. Attended upon by gods,
virtuous impulses that constitute the treasure of divinity, Brahma cameback again and told Vishwamitr that from that day he was a supreme
sage (Maharshi). Vishwamitr then said to the oldest of all gods, ?No, I
wish to be called a Brahmarshi who has conquered his senses.? Brahmaprotested that it could not be because he had not yet subdued his
senses. So Vishwamitr resumed his penance, so rigorously this time
that the smoke of the fire of penance began to rise from his head. Thengods entreated Brahma and the Lord of creation once more appeared
before Vishwamitr and said, ?Now you are a Brahmarshi.? Thereupon
Vishwamitr rejoined, ?If I am a Brahmarshi, let the Ved wed me.? Hisprayer was granted and the Ved was awakened in his heart. The unknown
essence-all the mysterious knowledge and wisdom of the Ved-now
became known. This direct apprehension of truth rather than a book isVed. So wherever Vishwamitr-an enlightened sage-is, the Ved abide there.
Lord Krishn has also revealed in the Geeta that the world is like
an indestructible Peepal tree whose root above is God and whose

Yatharth Geeta vi
branches spreading below are nature. The one who cuts this tree down
with the axe of renunciation and knows God is a knower of the Ved. So
the perception of God that comes after the cessation of nature?s
dominance is named ?Ved?. Since this vision is a gift from God himself,it is said to transcend even the Self. A sage is also one who has gone
beyond the Self by merging into the Supreme Spirit, and it is God who
then speaks through him. He turns into the medium by which the signscoming from God are transmitted. So a mere understanding of the literal
meaning of words and grammatical structures is not sufficient to
comprehend the truth underlying a sage?s utterances. Only the seekerwho has achieved the state of a non-person by actually treading the
action-oriented path of spiritual fulfillment, and whose ego is dissolved
in God, can comprehend this hidden meaning.
Although essentially impersonal, the Ved are compilations of the
utterances of a hundred or a hundred and fifty sage-seers. But whenthe same utterances are put down in writing by others, a code of socialorder and organization is also included along with them. Since this codeis believed to have come down from men of true accomplishment and
wisdom, people tend to adhere to its provisions even though they may
have nothing to do with dharm-fulfillment of one?s innate spiritualobligation. In our own time we see how even hangers-on of no
consequence get their work done by pretending to be intimate with
wielders of power, whereas as a matter of fact they may not be reallyeven known to them. Likewise, codifiers of rules for social life and
conduct also hide behind great sages and exploit their venerable names
to win subsistence. The same has happened with the Ved. Fortunately,however, what may be deemed the essence of the Ved-the divine
revelations of saints and seers who lived thousands of years ago-is
enshrined in the Upanishad. Neither dogma nor theology, thesemeditations concern direct, overwhelming religious experience in the
midst of life, and record insights into eternal truths. They are unified by
their common search for the true nature of reality, and in the course ofthis search provide glimpses into sublime states of the soul. And the
Geeta is an abstract of this essence that the Upanishad contain. Or, as

Preface vii
it might be said, the Geeta is the quintessence of the immortal substance
that the Upanishad have churned from the celestial poetry of the Ved.
Every sage who has attained to reality is also likewise an
embodiment of this quintessence. And in every part of the world a
compilation of his utterances is known as scripture. Nevertheless,
dogmatists and blind followers of creeds insist that this or that holy
book alone is a repository of truth. So we have people who say that
only the Koran is a revelation of truth and that its visionary experience
cannot be had again. There are others who hold forth that no man can
go to heaven without placing his faith in Jesus Christ, the one Son of
God. We often hear people say, ?There cannot be such a sage or seer
or prophet again.? But all this is nothing but blind, irrational orthodoxy.
The essence perceived by all true sages is the same.
Its universality makes the Geeta unique among the eminent sacred
works of the entire world. That also makes it a yardstick by which the
veracity of other holy books can be tested and judged. So the Geeta is
that touchstone that vindicates the substance of truth in other scriptures
and also resolves disputes arising from their sometimes incompatible
or even contradictory assertions. As it has been pointed out, almost all
holy books abound in provisions for worldly life and sustenance, and
also in directives for religious rites and ceremonies. There are also
introduced into them-in order to make them more attractive-sensational
and even dreadful accounts of what ought or ought not to be done. It is
so unfortunate that people blindly accept all these superficial matters
as the ?essence? of dharm, forgetting that regulations and modes of
worship that have been laid down for the conduct and sustenance of
physical life are bound to undergo change with place, time, and situation.
This really is behind all our communal and religious disharmony. The
uniqueness of the Geeta is that it rises above temporal questions and
reveals the dynamic way by which man may achieve perfection of the
Self and final absolution. There is not a single verse in the whole
composition that is concerned with sustenance of physical life. On the
contrary, each verse of the Geeta demands of its disciples that they
equip themselves and get ready for the inner war-the discipline of worship

Yatharth Geeta viii
and meditation. Instead of embroiling us, like other sacred books, in
the irreconcilable contradictions of heaven and hell, it is concerned
exclusively with demonstrating the way by which the Soul may attain to
the immortal state after which there are no shackles of birth and death.
Every sage-teacher-like a writer-has his own style and certain
favourite expressions. Besides choosing a poetic medium, YogeshwarKrishn has also repeatedly employed and stressed terms such as action(karm), yagya, varn, varnsankar, war, sphere (kshetr), and knowledge
or discrimination (gyan) in the Geeta. These words are invested with
unique meanings in the context and are certainly not divested of charmby frequent repetition. In both the original Hindi version and its English
rendering, the peculiar meanings of these expressions have been strictly
adhered to and there are explanations wherever required. These wordsand their unique meanings which have been almost completely lost
today constitute the main attraction of the Geeta. Since readers will
meet them again and again in Yatharth Geeta, brief definitions of theseterms are given below:
1. LORD KRISHN --  He was a Yogeshwar, an adept in yog, an
accomplished teacher.
2. TRUTH --  The Self or Soul alone is true.
3. SANATAN --  The word means ?eternal?. The Soul is eternal; God
is eternal.
4. SANATAN DHARM --  It is the conduct that unites with God.
5. WAR --  ?War? is the conflict between the riches of divinity and the
devilish hoard that represent the two distinct, contradictory
impulses of the spiritual heart. Its final consequence is the
annihilation of both.
6. KSHETR -- The word means ?sphere?. The sphere where the above
war is fought is the human body, a composite of the mind alongwith senses.
7. GYAN --  The word means ?knowledge/discernment?. Direct
perception of God is knowledge.

Preface ix
8. YOG --  Attainment to the Supreme Spirit who is beyond worldly
attachment and repulsion is yog.
9. GYAN YOG -- The Way of Knowledge or Discrimination. Worship
and meditation are action. Embarking on this action with reliance
upon one?s own prowess and ability is the Way of knowledge.
10. NISHKAM KARM YOG --  The Way of Selfless Action. Setting
upon action with dependence on an accomplished teacher and
total self-surrender is the Way of Selfless Action.
11. THE TRUTH REVEALED BY LORD KRISHN --  Lord Krishn has
revealed the same truth which seer-sages had perceived beforehim and which they will perceive hereafter.
12. YAGYA --  Yagya is the name of a certain process of worship and
meditation.
13. KARM -- The word means ?action?. Undertaking of yagya is action.
14. VARN -- The four stages into which action-the ordained mode of
worship-has been divided are the four varn; rather than being caste-
names they represent the lower and higher states of the same
worshiper.
15. VARNSANKAR --  The advent of confusion into the worshiper and
his consequent straying from the path of God-realization isvarnsankar.
16. HUMAN CATEGORIES --  Governed by natural properties, there
are two categories of men, the godly and the ungodly-the righteousand the unrighteous; driven by their inborn inclinations they ascendor descend.
17. DEITIES --  Deities represent the collective body of virtuous
impulses that abide in the realm of heart and enable the Soul toattain to the sublimity of the supreme God. The ignorant, who arelacking in discrimination, worship external deities.
18. AVATAR -- The word means ?incarnation?. This incarnation is
always brought about within man?s heart, never outside.
19. VIRAT DARSHAN - - The phrase may be translated as ?vision of
the Omnipresent?. It is a God-gifted intuition in a sage?s heart,

Yatharth Geeta x
perceptible only when the Supreme Being stands as a vision within
the worshiper.
20. THE REVERED GOD --  The supreme goal. The one transcendental
God alone is fit for worship. The place where he should be soughtfor is the realm of heart: and he can be realized only through the
medium of sages (Accomplished teachers) who have attained to
that unmanifest state.
Now, out of these, in order to understand Lord Krishn?s form one
has to study upto Chapter 3 and by Chapter 13 it will be evident that
Lord Krishn was an accomplished sage (yogi). The reality disclosed bythe Geeta will be known from Chapter 2 itself, which demonstrates how
?eternal? and ?truth? are substitutes; but these concepts are also dealt
with throughout the poem. The nature of ?war? will be clear by Chapter 4and whatever doubts there are in regard to this subject are all fully
resolved by Chapter 11. However, more light is thrown on it upto Chapter
16. One should turn again and again to Chapter 13 for its elaborateaccount of the sphere-the battlefield-where the ?war? is fought.
It will be clearly understood from Chapter 4 and then from Chapter
13 that perception is given the name of knowledge (gyan). Thesignificance of yog is distinctly seen by Chapter 6, although delineation
of the several aspects of the question again runs through the whole
composition. The Way of Knowledge will be clearly known from Chapters3 to 6 and there is hardly any need of going to any later chapters for it.
Introduced in Chapter 2, the Way of Selfless Action is explained and
dwelt upon right till the end. The meaning of yagya will be quite distinctfrom a reading of Chapters 3 and 4.
Action (karm) is first mentioned in the thirty-ninth verse of Chapter
2. Beginning with this, if we read upto Chapter 4, we will clearlyunderstand why ?action? is worship and meditation. Chapters 16 and 17
argue convincingly that this is truth. Whereas the problem of varnsankar
is dealt with in Chapter 3, incarnation (avatar) is illumined in Chapter 4.Although the fourfold varn classification is hinted at in Chapters 3 and
4, and for a more elaborate treatment of the subject we have to look

Preface xi
carefully at Chapter 18. Chapter 16 accounts for the division of men
into the two categories of the godly and the demoniacal. Chapters 10
and 11 reveal the omnipresent, cosmic form of God, but the subject is
also taken up in Chapters 7, 9, and 15. That the other gods and goddessesare only hollow myths is established in Chapters 7, 9, and 17. Chapters
3, 4, 6, and 18 show beyond any doubt that, rather than any external
place like a temple with its idols, the proper seat for worship of God isthe realm of the devotee?s heart within which the exercise of
contemplation of the incoming and outgoing breath is taken up in
seclusion. In case a reader is hard-pressed for time, he will grasp thecore of the Geeta by studying only the first six Chapters.
As it has already been said, instead of providing skills needed for
the sustenance of worldly, mortal life, the Geeta instructs its votaries inthe art and discipline that will surely bring them victory in the battle of
life. But the war the Geeta portrays is not the physical, worldly war that
is fought with deadly weapons, and in which no conquest is ever of apermanent character. The war of the Geeta is the clash of innate
properties and inclinations, the symbolic representation of which as
?war? has been a time-honoured literary tradition. What the Geeta portraysas a war between Dharmkshetr and Kurukshetr, between the riches of
piety and the accumulation of impiety, between righteousness and
unrighteousness, is no different from the Vedic battles between Indrand Vrit-between awareness and ignorance, or the Puranic struggles
between gods and demons, or the battles between Ram and Ravan and
between the Kaurav and the Pandav in the great Indian epics Ramayanand Mahabharat.
Where is the battleground on which this ?war? is fought? The
Dharmkshetr and Kurukshetr of the Geeta are no geographical locations.
As the poet of the Geeta has made Lord Krishn reveal to Arjun,
the physical, human body itself is the sphere-the patch of earth-onwhich the sown seeds of good and evil sprout as sanskar. The tensenses, mind, intellect, sensibility, ego, object carriers (tanmatra) of
the five senses of perception - word, touch, form, taste and smell -
these are the five objects of the senses, and the three nature-born

Yatharth Geeta xii
properties are said to be constituents of the whole extension of this
sphere. Helplessly driven by the three properties- sattwa, rajas, andtamas-man is compelled to act. He cannot survive for even a momentwithout undertaking action.  Kurukshetr is the sphere where, since times
immemorial, we have been undergoing repeated birth, repeated death,and repeated conception in the mother?s womb. When, through theagency of a noble teacher-preceptor, the seeker embarks on the true
way of worship and meditation and begins gradually to make his way
towards the Supreme Being-embodiment of the most sublime dharm,Kurukshetr (sphere of action) is transformed into Dharmkshetr (sphere
of righteousness).
Within this human body, in its mind and heart-the innermost seats
of thought and feeling-there have always dwelt the two distinct, primordialtendencies-the divine and the devilish. Pandu, the image of virtue, and
Kunti, the type of dutiful conduct, are parts of the treasure of divinity.Before the awakening of righteousness in a man?s heart, with his deficientunderstanding he regards whatever he does as an obligation. But, in
truth, he is incapable of doing what is worthwhile because there cannot
be an awareness of proper duty without the advent of moral virtue andgoodness. Karn, who spends all his life fighting the Pandav, is the only
acquisition of Kunti before she is wedded to Pandu. And the most
formidable enemy of her other sons-the Pandav-is this Karn. Karn isthus the type of action that is hostile to the essentially divine character
of the Self. He stands for traditions and usages which bind and hinder
men from getting rid of false, misguided rites and ceremonies. With theawakening of virtue, however, there is the gradual emergence of
Yudhisthir, the embodiment of dharm; Arjun, the image of affectionate
devotion; Bheem, the type of profound sentiment; Nakul, the symbol ofregulated life; Sahdev, the adherer to truth; Satyaki, the repository of
goodness; the King of Kashi, an emblem of the sanctity that abides
within man; and Kuntibhoj, the symbol of world-conquest through earnestundertaking of duty. The total number of the Pandav army is seven
akshauhini. ?Aksh? is another word for vision. That which is made up of
love and awareness of truth is the treasure of divinity. In fact, the seven

Preface xiii
akshauhini, which is given as the total strength of the Pandav army, is
no physical reckoning; the number verily represents the seven steps-
the seven stages of yog-that the seeker has to traverse in order to
reach the most sublime God, his supreme goal. Thus the number ofrighteous impulses is infinite.
Opposed to the Pandav army, embodiments of pious impulses
that are beyond counting, is the army of Kurukshetr-of the Kaurav-witha strength of eleven akshauhini. Eleven is the number of the ten sense
organs and the one mind. That which is constituted of the mind along
with the ten senses is the devilish hoard, a part of which is Dhritrashtr,who persists in ignorance in spite of his awareness of truth. Gandhari,
his consort, is the type of sense-bound disposition. Along with them
there are also Duryodhan, the symbol of excessive infatuation; the evil-minded Dushashan; Karn, the perpetrator of alien deeds; the deluded
Bheeshm; Dronacharya of dual conduct; Ashwatthama, the image of
attachment; the skeptical Vikarn; Kripacharya, the type of compassionateconduct in a state of incomplete worship; and Vidur, who stands for theSelf that dwells in ignorance but whose eyes are always aimed at the
Pandav. Vidur is the nature-bound Self that yet strives to make his way
towards virtue and spiritual enlightenment, because he is after all animmaculate part of the Supreme Spirit. Thus the number of unrighteous
impulses, too, is infinite.
As we have thus seen, the sphere-the battlefield-is only one, the
physical body, but the impulses that wage constant war against eachother on it are two. While one of them tempts man to regard nature as
real and thus effects his degradation to birth in lower forms, the otherconvinces him of the reality and all-pervading domination of the Supreme
Being and so provides access to him. When the seeker takes refuge in
a sage who has perceived the essence, there is a gradual but steadyascent of virtuous impulses on the one hand while, on the other, there
is a decline and then the final destruction of evil impulses. When there
remains no malady and the mind is perfectly restrained, even therestrained mind at last ceases to be and there is no longer any need of
even the treasure of divinity. Arjun has the vision that following after

Yatharth Geeta xiv
the Kaurav army, even the Pandav warriors are hurling themselves into
the fiery mouth of the Omnipresent and getting annihilated. Even pious
impulses are thus dissolved with final attainment and the ultimate
consequence then issues forth. If the accomplished sage undertakes
any enterprise after this final dissolution, it is only for the guidance and
edification of his less fortunate fellowmen and disciples.
Aiming at amelioration of the world, sages have devised concrete,
tangible metaphors to represent subtle abstractions. So it is that
characters of the Geeta are all symbolic-mere metaphors-for formless,
unmanifest inclinations and abilities. Some thirty to forty characters
are named in the first chapter, one-half of whom epitomize forces of
piety whereas the others stand for forces of impiety. The first half are
Pandav, while the others belong to the Kaurav camp. About half a dozen
of these characters are again alluded to on the occasion of Arjun?s
vision of the all-pervading God. Apart from these two chapters, there is
no other mention of these characters anywhere else in the Geeta. Out
of them Arjun alone is present before Yogeshwar Krishn from the
beginning to the end. And this Arjun too is, as we are about to see,
nothing more than a type. Rather than a three- dimensional individual,
he is the type of affectionate devotion.
At the outset Arjun is deeply agitated at the fancied prospect of
loss of what he mistakenly assumes to be the timeless and eternal
dharm of his family. But the Yogeshwar points out to him that grief and
irresolution are an offshoot of ignorance, for the Soul alone is eternal
and indestructible. The body is perishable and Arjun is exhorted to fight
because it is so. But it is not clear from Lord Krishn?s exhortation whether
Arjun has to slay the Kaurav alone. If he has to destroy bodies, are the
Pandav also not physical beings? Is it not that Arjun?s kinsmen are on
both sides? Is it possible to kill the sanskar-based body with a sword?
Even more intriguingly, if the body is perishable and without real
existence, who is this Arjun? And who is Lord Krishn standing by to
defend and protect? Is he with Arjun to save and preserve a body?
Doesn?t he proclaim that one who toils for the body is a sinful, deluded
man who lives in vain? So if Lord Krishn is standing up for the sake of

Preface xv
a mere body, isn?t he himself a sinful, deluded being with a futile life?
But, as we have seen, Arjun of the Geeta is no more than a symbol-the
embodiment of loving devotion.
The accomplished teacher is ever in readiness to help his disciple.
Arjun and Lord Krishn are respectively the loving, dedicated pupil andthe concerned, caring mentor. Since he is confused about the meaningof dharm, he most humbly entreats Lord Krishn to enlighten him on that
which brings the most propitious felicity to the Self. Arjun?s yearning is
for final beatitude rather than for any material reward. So he begs LordKrishn not only to instruct but also support and secure him, for he is a
pupil who has found shelter under a loving teacher. This theme of an
earnest and devoted pupil learning from an enlightened and caringteacher-preceptor runs through the whole of the Geeta.
Moved by sentiment, if someone insisted on staying with my
most Revered and noble mentor Parmanand Ji, he would say, ?Go andlive anywhere you like with your body, but in your mind be with me.
Every morning and evening recite some one or two-lettered name like
Ram, Shiv, or OM, and contemplate my form in your heart. If you cansecurely hold on to this form, I shall give you the one whose name you
recite. When your hold gets yet stronger, I shall always abide in your
heart like a charioteer.? When our Self has become one with the form ofthe accomplished teacher, he dwells as intimately with us as our own
limbs. He begins to guide even before the emergence of virtuous
inclinations within the mind. And when he abides in the devotee?s heart,he is ever awake and inseparably with this disciple?s Self.
After viewing Yogeshwar Krishn?s manifold glories in Chapter 11,
Arjun cringes with fear and begins to apologize for his petty improprieties.As an affectionate friend and considerate teacher, Lord Krishn readily
forgives him and re-assumes his placid, benign form. He then tells
Arjun that neither has anyone seen this manifestation of his in the pastnor can anyone see it in the future. If it is so, vision of the Supreme
Spirit was meant for Arjun alone, and the Geeta then is apparently of no
use for us. But doesn?t Sanjay have the same vision along with Arjun?And hasn?t Lord Krishn given the assurance earlier that, enlightened

Yatharth Geeta xvi
and redeemed by the yagya of knowledge, many sages have been
blessed with a direct perception of him? What after all does Yogeshwar
Krishn intend to communicate? Arjun is a personification of affectionand dedication, and these are feelings shared by all mankind. No man
devoid of these sentiments has seen the coveted God before and no
man devoid of these sentiments can see him in the future. In Goswami
Tulsidas?s words, Ram cannot be realized without loving faith despite
endless recitation, yog, and relinquishment (ramcharitmanas, 7/61/1).
So Arjun is a symbolic figure. And if it is not so, it would be wiser of us
to keep the Geeta aside, for in that case Arjun alone was entitled to the
perception of God.
At the end of the same chapter (chapter 11, verse 54), Lord Krishn
assures his friend and devotee, ?O Arjun, a man of great penance, a
worshiper can know this form of mine directly, acquire its essence, and
even become one with it by total and unswerving devotion.? ?Intent
devotion? is only another expression for ?tender affection?. And that is
the distinguishing mark of Arjun. He is also a symbol of seeking. An
avatar, too, is symbolical and so are also all the other characters of the
Geeta so that we may be enabled to see in the great war of Kurukshetr
?the battle-field of the Soul?.
Irrespective of whether there were actual historical personages
such as Arjun and Lord Krishn, and of whether there was an actual war
called the Mahabharat, the Geeta is by no means a portrayal of physical
warfare. Standing on the brink of that historical war, it was not his army
but Arjun who was unnerved. The army was fully in readiness to fight.
Doesn?t it imply, then, that by preaching to Arjun, Lord Krishn had only
conferred on his beloved friend and disciple the ability to be worthy of
his army? In fact, the whole of the means for spiritual accomplishment
cannot be put down in black and white. Even after one has gone through
the Geeta several times, there is yet the necessity of actually traversing
the path of God-realization that the Lord has charted. This is the
necessity- which ?Yatharth Geeta? is all about.
Shree Gurupurnima
July 24, 1983 -  Swami Adgadanand

Chapter 1 1
CHAPTER 1
THE YOG  OF
IRRESOLUTION  AND  GRIEF
1. ?Dhritrashtr said, ?Assembled at Kurukshetr1, at Dharmkshetr,
and eager for combat, O Sanjay, what did my and Pandu?s
sons do???
Dhritrashtr is the very image of ignorance; and Sanjay is the
embodiment of self-restraint. Ignorance lurks at the core of the objective,
the outward-looking mind. With his mind enveloped in darkness,Dhritrashtr is blind since birth, but he sees and hears through Sanjay,the epitome of self-control. He knows that God alone is real, but as longas his infatuation for Duryodhan born from ignorance lasts, his innereye will be focused on the Kaurav, who symbolize the ungodly forcesof negative, sinful impulses.
The human body is a field for combat. When there is abundance
of divinity in the realm of the heart, the body is transmuted into aDharmkshetr (field of dharm), but it degenerates into a Kurukshetr whenit is infested with demoniacal powers. Kuru means ?do? and the word isan imperative. As Lord Krishn has said, ?Driven by the three properties
2
born out of prakriti (nature) man is compelled to act; without action hecannot even live for a moment.? These properties, virtue, ignorance,
Oe=leje<?^ GJeeÛe-
Oece&#es$es  kegâ®#es$es  meceJeslee  ÙegÙeglmeJe:~
ceecekeâe: heeC[Jee§ewJe efkeâcekegâJe&le meÀeÙe~~1~~
1. The field or sphere of dharm. Dharm is not only moral virtues and good works, but
the essential character that enables being to be its own Self.
2. Sattwa, tamas and rajas, the three gun or properties or constituent qualities of all
beings. Sattwa is virtue or the quality of goodness; tamas is ignorance or darkness,
and rajas is passion or moral blindness.dhçtarÂîòra uvÂca-
dharmakîetre kurukîetre samavetÂ yuyutsavaÉ |
mÂmakÂÉ pÂàÅavÂïcaiva kimakurvata saájaya ||1||

Yatharth Geeta 2
and passion, compel him to act. Even in sleep action does not cease,
for it is the necessary sustenance for the body. The three propertiesbind men, from the level of gods to that of the lowest creatures such asworms. So long as the material world and its properties are, kuru mustbe. Therefore, the sphere of birth and death, of sinful impulses, whichare evolved from a previous source or prakriti (nature) is Kurukshetr,whereas the sphere of righteous impulses which guide the Self to God,the highest spiritual reality, is Dharmkshetr.
Archaeologists are engaged in research in Punjab, Kashi, and
Prayag to locate Kurukshetr. But the poet of the Geeta has himselfsuggested, through Lord Krishn, where the war of his sacred poem wasfought. ?This body is itself, O Arjun, a battlefield, and one who conquersit grows spiritually dexterous by perceiving its essence.? He thenelaborates the structure of this ?battlefield?, sphere of action, constitutedof ten perceptors
3, the objective and the subjective mind, the ego, all
the five perversions [object carriers (tanmatra) of the five senses ofperception - word, touch, form, taste and smell - these are the fiveobjects of the senses] and the three properties. The body itself is afield, a ring or an arena. The forces that clash on this field are twofold,the godly and the ungodly, the divine and the devilish, the offspring ofPandu and those of Dhritrashtr, the forces that are congenial to theessentially divine character of the Self and those which offend anddemean it.
The clue to the mystery of the conflict between the opposed
impulses begins to be seen when one turns for enlightenment to anexalted sage who has enriched himself with worship and meditation.This field belongs to one who realizes its essence, and the war foughton it is the only real war. History is crowded with wars of the world, butthe victors in these wars have but sought in vain for a permanentconquest. These wars were nothing beyond acts of retribution. Truevictory lies in subduing matter and in perceiving, as well as becomingone with, the Supreme Spirit that transcends it. This is the only conquest
3. The ten senses: five of perception (gyanendriy) and five of action (karmendriy).

Chapter 1 3
in which there is no prospect of defeat. This is true salvation after
which there are no fetters of birth and death.
The mind lying in the abyss of ignorance perceives through self
restraint, and thus knows what has transpired on the battlefield, wherefighters include even those who have known its reality. Vision is ever inproportion to mastery of the mind and the senses.
2. ?Sanjay said, ?At the time, after having seen the Pandav army
standing in battle array, King Duryodhan approached his
teacher Dronachary and spoke thus.? ??
Dual conduct itself is Dronachary. When the awareness dawns
that we are alienated from God there arises in the heart an acute hunger
for the attainment of that exalted Spirit. Only then do we set out to seekan accomplished teacher, a realized sage (Guru). Between the twoopposed impulses, this awareness is the first initiator into wisdom,although the teacher of ultimate excellence will be Yogeshwar Krishnhimself, an adept in yog.
King Duryodhan, an embodiment of excessive attachment to
worldly objects, goes to his teacher. Attachment is at the root of allgriefs, indeed their sovereign. It tempts one away from the spiritualtreasure and so it is named Duryodhan. Only the Soul property is thestable property and it is attachment which generates impurity in it. Itdraws one to the material world. But it also provides the primary motivefor enlightenment. Inquisitiveness is possible only as long as there isattachment, or else only the impeccable Spirit remains.
So, after having seen the Pandav army arrayed, that is, after
having glimpsed the righteous impulses that are in tune with the Self,Duryodhan, a victim of attachment, goes to his teacher Dronacharyand says:
me_peÙe GJeeÛe-
Â°dJee leg heeC[Jeeveerkebâ JÙet{b ogÙeexOevemleoe~DeeÛeeÙe&ceghemeÁcÙe jepee JeÛeveceyeÇJeerled~~2~~
saájaya uvÂca-
dçîòvÂ tu pÂàÅavÂnÍkaØ vyöÅhaØ duryodhanastadÂ |ÂcÂryamupasaßgamya rÂjÂ vacanamabravÍt ||2||

Yatharth Geeta 4
3. ?Behold, O master, this massive army of Pandu?s sons
marshaled in battle formation by your wise pupil, the son of
Drupad (Dhristdyumn).??
Dhristdyumn, the son of Drupad, is the steadfast mind that
treasures faith in the universal, immutable reality. He is thus the master,
the type of righteous impulses that lead to selfless activity in a spirit ofegoless reverence to spiritual divinity. ?Not means but the determinationof mind needs to be firm.??
Let us now review the Pandav army at length.
4. ?Here in the army are many valiant archers, Yuyudhan, Virat
and the great martial commander Drupad, who are a worthymatch for the brave Arjun and Bheem, and...??
This army is composed of those who can guide souls to the
Supreme Spirit, like Bheem who is an embodiment of resolute sentiment,
the image of tender devotion Arjun, and many other valiant warriorssuch as Satyaki, endowed with goodness, Virat and the great warriorleader Drupad, symbolizing consistency and steadfastness on the pathof spirituality, and...
5. ?Dhrishtketu, Chekitan, and the mighty King of Kashi, as well
as Purujeet and Kuntibhoj, and Shaiby, the unparalleled
among men and...??
Dhrishtketu, the steadfast-in-duty, Chekitan, who can rein in his
straying thought and concentrate it on the Supreme Spirit. Kashiraj -
an emblem of the sacredness that resides within the world of the body.
heMÙewleeb heeC[gheg$eeCeeceeÛeeÙe& cenleeR Ûecetced~
JÙet{eb õgheoheg$esCe leJe efMe<ÙesCe Oeercelee~~3~~De$e Metje cens<Jeemee Yeerceepeg&vemecee ÙegefOe~
ÙegÙegOeevees efJeje?§e õgheo§e cenejLe:~~4~~
Oe=°kesâleg§esefkeâleeve: keâeefMejepe§e JeerÙe&Jeeved~heg®efpelkegâefvleYeespe§e MewyÙe§e vejhegÁJe:~~5~~
païyaitÂØ pÂàÅuputrÂàÂmÂcÂrya mahatÍØ camöm |
vyöÅhÂØ drupadaputreàa tava ïiîyeàa dhÍmatÂ ||3||atra ïörÂ maheîvÂsÂ bhÍmÂrjunasamÂ yudhi |
yuyudhÂno virÂòaïca drupadaïca mahÂrathaÉ ||4||
dhçîòaketuïcekitÂnaÉ kÂïirÂjaïca vÍryavÂn |purujit kuntibhojaïca ïaibyaïca narapußgavaÉ ||5||

Chapter 1 5
Purujeet, the one who obtains victory over matter in all its forms-gross,
subtle, and instrumental. Kuntibhoj, who conquers worldly life by doingwhat is worthy of doing. Then Shaiby, of virtuous conduct.
6. ?The valorous Yudhmanyu, the mighty Uttmauja, Saubhadr,
and Draupadi?s five sons, all great warriors.??The heroic Yudhmanyu of warlike temper; Uttmauja with the spirit
of abandon that flows from sacred excellence; Abhimanyu (Saubhadr),
Subhadra?s son, with a mind without fear because it is propped up byrighteousness, and the five sons of Draupadi who herself is a form ofdiscernment of the divine, all are great warriors named tenderness,beauty, compassion, spiritual repose and consistency. All of them arenoted for their ability to traverse the path of spiritual fulfillment withperfect skill.
Duryodhan thus enumerates to his teacher about a score of names
from the side of the Pandav, which represent some vital principles ofdivine excellence. Although the monarch of impulses that are alien tothe essentially spiritual character of the Self, it is ignorance (attachment)that first motivates us to strive for the realization of the treasure ofdivinity.
As for his own side, Duryodhan dwells on it but briefly. Had it
been an actual, external war, he would have given an elaborate accountof his army. But only a few perversions are cited, for they have to beconquered and they are destructible. There are mentioned only abouthalf a dozen of these, at the heart of all of which there yet dwells anunworldly propensity.
ÙegOeecevÙeg§e efJe?eâevle Gòeceewpee§e JeerÙe&Jeeved~
meewYeões õewheosÙee§e meJe& SJe cenejLee:~~6~~
yudhÂmanyuïca vikrÂnta uttamaujÂïca vÍryavÂn |
saubhadro draupadeyÂïca sarva eva mahÂrathÂÉ ||6||

Yatharth Geeta 6
7. ?Be it known to you, O the worthiest of the twice-born4, the
names of those who are most eminent amongst us, the chiefs
of our army; these I now name for your information.?
?The worthiest of the twice-born.? That is how Duryodhan
addresses his teacher Dronachary before he introduces to him the chiefs
of his army. ?The worthiest of the twice-born? would hardly be anappropriate term of address for a commander-in-chief if the war were aphysical, external war. In fact, the Geeta dwells upon the conflict betweencontradictory innate impulses, upon the dual conduct which isDronachary. The world of matter exists and there is duality if we areeven in the least isolated from God. However, the urge, too, forovercoming this duality of object-spirit is derived first from the teacherDronachary. It is imperfect knowledge that induces the hunger forenlightenment.
It is now time to have a look at the leaders of the impulses which
are hostile to the essentially sacred character of the Self.
8.?Your venerable self, Bheeshm and Karn, and also Kripachary-
victor in wars, Ashwatthama and Vikarn, as well as Saumdutti
(Bhurishrawa, son of Somdutt).??
The commander-in-chief is Dronachary himself, symbolizing dual
conduct. And then there is the grandsire Bheeshm, the very image of
delusion. Delusion is the fountainhead of deviation from the ideal state.Since it survives till the very end, delusion is the grandsire. The wholearmy has perished, but Bheeshm yet lives on. He lies unconscious onhis bed of arrows and still continues to breathe. Like Bheeshm, too, areKarn, a betrayer of the sacred character of Self, and the conquering
Demceekebâ leg efJeefMe°e Ùes leeefVeyeesOe efÉpeesòece~
veeÙekeâe cece mewvÙemÙe me_%eeLeË leevyeÇJeerefce les~~7~~YeJeevYeer<ce§e keâCe&§e ke=âhe§e meefceefleÀeÙe:~
DeÕelLeecee efJekeâCe&§e meewceoefòemleLewJe Ûe~~8~~
4. ?Twice-born? because of the spiritual birth or awakening (attainments) that comes
through self-study and contemplation.asmÂkaØ tu viïiîòÂ ye tÂnnibodha dvijottama |
nÂyakÂ mama sainyasya saØjáÂrthaØ tÂnbravÍmi te ||7||bhavÂnbhÍîmaïca karàaïca kçpaïca samitiØjayaÉ |
aïvatthÂmÂ vikaràaïca saumadattistathaiva ca ||8||

Chapter 1 7
warrior Kripachary. Kripachary represents the act of compassion by the
seeker in the state before Self-realization. God is the mine of compassionand the sage attains to the same state after fulfillment. But during theperiod up to accomplishment, so long as the worshiper is removed fromGod and God is removed from him, when the uncongenial impulses arestill alive and strong, and he is besieged by delusion-if the seeker feelscompassion at this stage, he is destroyed. For acting with pity, Sitahad to undergo penance in Lanka for years.
Vishwamitr fell from grace because he felt tenderness at such a
stage. Maharshi Patanjali, the preceptor of yog-aphorism, has expresseda similar view. ?Attainments made, through perfect meditation are indeedattainments, but they are also as formidable obstacles in the way of theendeavour of the individual Soul for identification with the SupremeSpirit as sensual desire, anger, greed, and delusion.? Goswami Tulsidashas said, ?O Garud, manifold are obstacles built up by maya when westrive to unravel the knots of properties of nature-mere distortions oftruth. Attainment of sanctity elevates, but the mind conjures up onetemptation after another.??
The illusory maya obstructs in many ways. It brings men
accomplishments and untold wealth, and even turns them into holybeings. If a being of such accomplishment just passes by, even adying man is revived. Notwithstanding the recovery of the patient,however, the seeker shall be destroyed if he regards the cure as hisown achievement. Instead of one sickness a thousand maladies willswarm upon his mind, the process of reverent contemplation of thedivine will be interrupted, and he will so stray from the right path that theworld of matter overwhelms him. If the goal is distant and the seekerfeels compassion, this one act alone is sufficient to result in the debacleof his whole army. So he has to be on his guard against the feeling ofcompassion until the moment of final attainment, although at the sametime it is also true that compassion is the hallmark of a saint. Butbefore ultimate fulfillment, compassion is the mightiest warrior amongthe evil, demoniacal impulses. It is thus that Ashwatthama is an image

Yatharth Geeta 8
of inordinate attachment, Vikarn of indecision, and Bhurishrawa of
perplexity and confusion. They are all chiefs of the outward flowingcurrent of life.
Similarly Ashwatthama, the son of Dronachary, is the symbol of
fixation. Fixation on or with things anywhere in the world is an adhesionof mind or emotion. Dual conduct, which is represented by Dronachary,is the father of fixation. Achary Drone could not be killed while he stillhad arms in his hand, he was unconquerable. So Lord Krishn said,?There is an elephant on the side of the Kauravas which is also namedAshwatthama. Bheem should kill it and announce that Ashwatthamahas been killed. On getting this shocking information the Achary Dronewould be hit at the core, and would become slack. Seizing thisopportunity promptly he should be slayed.? Bheem killed the said elephantand spread the word that Ashwatthama had been killed. Achary Dronemisunderstood and thought that his son Ashwatthama had been killed.He lost his nerve and the bow fell from his hand. In utter dejection hesat down motionless on the battlefield. He was beheaded. Too muchattachment with his son became the cause of Dronachary?s death.Ashwatthama was blessed with longevity. Since fixation remains presentas an obstacle until the last moment, so Ashwatthama has been saidto be immortal.
Vikarn is the symbol of alluring fancies. In the higher stage of
spiritual practice (sadhna) specific fancies start cropping up. A lot ofalluring thoughts start emerging in the mind with regard to the possibilityof acquisition of super-natural power (siddhis) as the fruit of spiritualpractices (action) which God may bestow after fulfillment. Thecontemplation of God is replaced by the contemplation of divineexcellences. A seeker?s eye should always be only on action, he shouldnot bother about the fruit or result of it. But when he is lost in themeditation of Ridhis-Siddhis (spiritual excellences), he is entrapped inthe chain of imaginary thoughts (vikalpas). Such fanciful thoughts arespecific and are terrible obstructions in the spiritual pursuit of the seekerand are symbolized here as Vikarn.

Chapter 1 9
Bhurishrawa represents the deluded state of being puffed up
(shwas). When the state of spiritual exercitation (sadhana) gets elevated,
the seeker is admired by others as a mahatma (elevated soul) or as anaccomplished saint armed with divine power, so great that even theLokpals (protectors of the three worlds) bow down their heads beforehim. If the seeker gets puffed up by such acclaim and admiration andgoes astray - this is nothing but deluded self-importance for whichBhurishrawa stands as a symbol. Warning against it Revered Gurudevused to say, ?Despite the showers of flowers on you by the world, despiteits admirations of you by it and its acclaim calling you then Vishwaguru(teacher of the world), you would get nothing, not even tears to weep. IfGod proclaims you to be a Sadhu (saint), only then you would geteverything. The world might say so or not, it matters little.? Thus theweakness of being swayed by the praises of the world is the state ofdeluded self-importance and this is represented by Bhurishrawa.Repeated plaudits and praises can lead to the diminution of sadhna sothis type of delusion is Bhurishrawa.
These are the names of three types of susceptibilities and
deformations which creep into sadhna when the state of restraint isexalted, but they are aberrations caused by external impulses.
9. ?And (there are) many other skilled warriors, too, equipped
with numerous arms, who have forsaken hope of life for my
sake.??
And many other valiant warriors are resolved, Duryodhan intimates
to Dronachary, to fight for his sake even at the cost of their life. But
there is no precise enumeration of them. Duryodhan then points out theinnate qualities with which each of the two armies is fortified.
DevÙes Ûe yenJe: Metje ceoLex lÙeòeâpeerefJelee:~
veeveeMe?eØenjCee: meJex ÙegæefJeMeejoe:~~9~~
anye ca bahavaÉ ïurÂ madarthe tyaktajÍvitÂÉ |
nÂnÂïastrapraharaàÂÉ sarve yuddhaviïÂradÂÉ ||9||

Yatharth Geeta 10
10. ?Our army defended by Bheeshm is unconquerable, while
their army defended by Bheem is easy to vanquish.??
Duryodhan?s army, ?defended? by Bheeshm, is invincible, whereas
the opposing army of the Pandav, ?defended? by Bheem, is easy to
conquer. The use of ambiguous puns such as a paryaptam andaparyaptam is itself a sign of Duryodhan?s doubtful state of mind. Sowe have to look carefully at the power that Bheeshm represents onwhich all the Kaurav hopes rest, as well as the quality symbolized byBheem which the Pandav-endowed with the treasure of divinity-relyupon. Duryodhan then gives his final estimate of the situation.
11. ?So, while keeping to your respective stations in the several
divisions, all of you should doubtlessly protect Bheeshm
alone on all sides.?
Duryodhan commands all his chiefs to keep to their posts and
yet protect Bheeshm on all sides. The Kaurav cannot be defeated if
Bheeshm is safe and alive. So it is obligatory for all the Kaurav chiefsto defend Bheeshm rather than fight with the Pandav. This is intriguing.After all, what kind of ?defender? is this Bheeshm who cannot evendefend himself? What complicates the matter even more is that theKaurav are also wholly dependent on him. So they have to devise allpossible measures of defence for him. This is certainly no physicalwarrior. Bheeshm is delusion. So long as delusion is alive, unrighteousimpulses cannot be vanquished. ?Invincible? here means ?difficult tovanquish? rather than ?impossible to vanquish.? As Goswami Tulsidashas said, ?The most difficult to conquer is the hostile world of matterand the one who subdues it is indeed heroic.??
If delusion ceases, ignorance too ceases to exist and the residues
of negative feelings such as excessive attachment hasten to a quick
DeheÙee&hleb leomceekebâ yeueb Yeer<ceeefYejef#eleced~
heÙee&hleb eflJeocesles<eeb yeueb YeerceeefYejef#eleced~~10~~
DeÙeves<eg Ûe meJex<eg ÙeLeeYeeieceJeefmLelee:~Yeer<cecesJeeefYej#evleg YeJevle: meJe& SJe efn~~11~~
aparyÂptaØ tadasmÂkaØ balaØ bhÍîmÂbhirakîitam |
paryÂptaØ tvidameteîÂØ balaØ bhÍmÂbhirakîitam ||10||
ayaneîu ca sarveîu yathÂbhÂgamavasthitÂÉ |bhÍîmamevÂbhirakîantu bhavantaÉ sarva eva hi ||11||

Chapter 1 11
demise. Bheeshm is blessed with death by wish. So the death of desire
and death of delusion are one and the same. This idea has been solucidly expressed by Sage Kabir: ?Since desire is the maker of birthand illusion, and it is desire that creates the material world, he whoabandons desire is the one who cannot be conquered.??
That which is free from delusion is eternal and unmanifest. Desire
is illusion and progenitor of the world. In Kabir?s view, ?the Self whichachieves freedom from desire is united with the fathomless, eternal,boundless reality. One who is free from desire dwells within the Selfand never falls from grace, for he has his being in the Supreme Spirit.?At the beginning there are numerous desires, but eventually thereremains only a longing for the realization of God. The fulfillment, too, ofthis wish also marks the end of desire. Had there been something higher,greater, or more precious than God, one, would surely have craved forit. But when there is nothing beyond or above him, what else can bedesired? When all things that can be had are achieved, the very rootsof desire are destroyed and delusion perishes utterly. This is Bheeshm?sdeath by wish. Thus, defended by Bheeshm, Duryodhan?s army isinvincible in every respect. Ignorance is present as long as there isdelusion. When delusion is dead, ignorance also dies.
The Pandav army, on the contrary, defended as it is by Bheem,
is easy to conquer. Bheem is the very image of sentiment. God is insacred metaphysical feelings and can be experienced through whole-hearted reverence and spiritual sentiment within the devout heart. LordKrishn has described it as 'Shraddha' which can be defined as highestlevel of trust beyond mind and senses. It lays hold on even God. Thesentiment of devotion is a pious impulse of flawless perfection. It is aprotector of righteousness. Lord Krishn had named it as 'shraddha?. Onthe one hand so resourceful that it brings about realization of theSupreme Spirit, on the other hand it is also so delicate and fragile thatthis day?s fidelity and adherence often turn into nothingness and evenoutright privation on the next day. Today we admire a sage for hisvirtue, but the very next day we grumble and cavil because we have

Yatharth Geeta 12
seen him relishing delicacies. Devotion is shaken by suspicion of even
the slightest flaw in the loved one. The impulse of righteousness isundermined and the ties with the object of affectionate devotion arebroken. So it is that the Pandav army defended by Bheem can beconquered with ease. Maharshi Patanjali has given expression to asimilar view. ?Only meditation practiced for a long time with constantdevotion and reverence can be firm.??
Now let us listen to the flourish of the warriors? conches.
12. ?To Duryodhan?s delight then, his mighty grandsire and the
eldest of the Kaurav (Bheeshm) blew his conch to blare fortha lion-like roar.??
Conches are blown after the Kaurav have taken stock of their
strength. The trumpeting of conches is a declaration of the intention, of
each of the chiefs, of what he can offer after conquest. The mightygrandsire Bheeshm, the eldest of the Kaurav, blows his conch to producea lion-like roar which gladdens Duryodhan?s heart. The lion representsthe terrible, tooth-and-claw, aspect of nature. Our hair stands on endand our hearts beat violently when we hear the roar of a lion in a still,solitary forest even though we are miles away from the beast. Fear is aproperty of nature, not of God. Bheeshm is the very image of delusion.If delusion prevails, it will enwrap the material world?s forest of fearwhich we inhabit in yet another shroud of fear to make the existingdread even more frightening. Delusion cannot offer anything else exceptthis. So renunciation of the material world is the right step for one whoquests for Self-realization. Worldly inclinations are like a mirage-a mereshadow of ignorance, and the Kaurav have nothing to declare againstthis. Numerous conches from their side are trumpeted simultaneously,but they altogether inspire no other feeling except fear. Fear, althoughin varying degrees, is born out of each perversion. Similar is also themessage of the conches of the other Kaurav chiefs.
lemÙe  meÀeveÙevn<eË  kegâ®Je=æ:  efheleecen:~
efmebnveeob efJeveÅeesÛÛew: MeÈb oOceew ØeleeheJeeved~~12
tasya saájanayanharîaØ kuruvçddhaÉ pitÂmahaÉ |
siØhanÂdaØ vinadyoccaiÉ ïaßkhaØ dadhmau pratÂpavÂn||12

Chapter 1 13
13. ?Then there abruptly arose a tumult of conches and
kettledrums, tabors, drums, and cow-horns.??
After Bheeshm?s blowing of his conch, numerous other conches,
drums, and trumpets are sounded together, and they make an awesome
noise. The Kaurav have no message other than that of fear. Intoxicatedwith a sense of false success, the outward-looking impulses that offendand demean the human Soul render the bonds of infatuation yet stronger.
Now the Pandav, representing righteous impulses that are in
harmony with the divine character of the Self, respond to the Kauravchallenge with their own declarations, the first of which is made byYogeshwar Krishn himself.
14. ?Then, too, Madhav (Krishn) and Pandu?s son (Arjun), seated
in the magnificent chariot to which white steeds were yoked,
blew their celestial conches.??
After the Kaurav, Lord Krishn and Arjun, riding in their magnificent,
sacred chariot drawn by flawlessly white horses (?white? symbolizes
purity), also blow their ?celestial? conches. ?Celestial? means beyondthe material world. Yogeshwar Krishn?s transcendental message is apromise to render unto souls the most auspicious, unworldly existencethat is beyond the worlds of both mortals and gods, and verily the wholeuniverse (Brahmlok), which are all afflicted with the fear of birth anddeath. The chariot under his charge is not made of gold and silver andwood; everything about him is celestial, the chariot, the conch and,therefore, also his message. Beyond these worlds there is only the oneunique and indescribable God. Lord Krishn?s message is of establishinga direct contact with this Supreme Being. But how will he affect thisstate?
lele: MeÈe§e YesÙe&§e heCeJeevekeâieescegKee:~
menmewJeeYÙenvÙevle me MeyomlegcegueesÓYeJeled~~13~~lele: Õeslewn&ÙewÙeg&òesâ cenefle mÙevoves efmLeleew~
ceeOeJe: heeC[Je§ewJe efoJÙeew MeÈew ØeoOceleg:~~14
tataÉ ïaßkhÂïca bheryaïca paàavÂnakagomukhÂÉ |
sahasaivÂbhyahanyanta sa ïabdastumulo'bhavat ||13||tataÉ ïvetairhayairyukte mahati syandane sthitau |
mÂdhavaÉ pÂàÅavaïcaiva divyau ïaßkhau pradadhmatuÉ||14

Yatharth Geeta 14
15. ??While Hrishikesh (Krishn) blew his conch Panchjanya and
Dhananjay (Arjun) the conch named Devdutt, the Vrikodar5
(Bheem) of awesome deeds blew the great conch Paundr.??
So Hrishikesh (lord of the senses), who knows all the mysteries
of the human heart, blows the conch Panchjanya. This is a declaration
of his intent to restrain the five organs of perception which correspondto word, touch, form, taste, and smell, and to transmute their inclinationsinto devotion. Exerting control on the wild senses and disciplining theminto faithful servitors is the gift from an accomplished teacher; the gift,indeed, from the admired God. Lord Krishn is a yogi, an ideal teacher.As Arjun says in the Geeta, ? Lord, I am thy disciple.? It is only anaccomplished teacher; who can make us relinquish all objects of sensualpleasure, and to see and listen to and touch nothing except the covetedGod.
Dhananjay (the victor of divine impulses) is the affectionate
devotion that attains to the state of divine exaltation. This devotion is afeeling of tenderness for the desired object, which includes within itselfall the experiences of devotees, even pangs of separation andoccasional disenchantment and tears. There should be nothing for adevotee except the longed-for God. If the devotion to him is perfect, itembraces the virtues that provide access to the Supreme Spirit.Dhananjay is another name of this faculty. One kind of wealth is theexternal riches which are needed for physical sustenance, but that hasnothing to do with the Self. The really lasting wealth of man, which hecan truly call his own, is realization of his Self, the God within. In theBrihadaranyak Upanishad, Yagnavalkya teaches the same to his wifeMaitreyi when she asks him, ?My lord, if this whole earth belonged tome with all its riches, should I through its possession attain immortality??The sage replies, ?No, your life would be like that of the wealthy. None
heeÃepevÙeb ù<eerkesâMees osJeoòeb OeveÀeÙe:~
heewC[^b oOceew ceneMeÈb Yeercekeâcee& Je=keâesoj:~~15
5. Vrikodar is literally interpreted, the one with a wolf?s belly which is never full.
Likewise, a devotee?s heart longing for God is never satiated.pÂácajanyaØ hçîÍkeïo devadattaØ dhanaájayaÉ |
pauàÅraØ dadhmau mahÂïaßkhaØ bhÍmakarmÂ vçkodaraÉ||15

Chapter 1 15
can possibly hope to be immortal through wealth. Its remedy is to
accumulate soul asset.??
Bheem of awesome deeds blows his great conch Paundr, which
denotes sentiment. The heart is the spring as well as the habitat offeeling. This is why Bheem is called Vrikodar, the large-hearted. Youare attached to a child, but that attachment belongs essentially to yourheart. It only manifests itself in the child. Sentiment is fathomless andmighty, and this sentiment is Bheem?s great conch that is now blown.The affection that he represents is embodied in sentiment. That is whyBheem blows the conch named Paundr. However, although sentimentis mighty, it can be so only through the medium of love. GoswamiTulsidas admits that he has known the omnipresence of God only throughits manifestation in love.
16. ?King Yudhisthir, the son of Kunti, blew the conch Anantvijay,
whereas Nakul and Sahdev blew their conches Sughosh and
Manipushpak.?
King Yudhisthir blows the conch Anantvijay (endless conquest).
Kunti is the very image of dutifulness; and Yudhisthir, the embodiment
of dharm (natural piety). If one?s adherence to dharm is steady,Anantvijay will bring about the absorption of the Self in the boundlessGod. The one who is firm in battle is Yudhisthir: one who is unshakenby the conflicts between Self and the material world-between the bodyand the transcendental Soul, and to whom the essence of the sphere ofaction has been revealed. He is enabled eventually, by God who aloneis real, ceaseless, and immutable, to overcome all the contradictions.
Nakul, who is a symbol of regulated life (observance)
6, blows the
conch named Sughosh. As observance grows firmer, evil is subduedand the dominance of righteousness is proclaimed. Sahdev, the adherer
DevevleefJepeÙeb jepee kegâvleerheg$ees ÙegefOeef?j:~
vekegâue: menosJe§e megIees<eceefCeheg<hekeâew~~16~~
6. In yog philosophy, observance of the mind is accepted as the second of the eight
principal steps of yog.anantavijayaØ rÂjÂ kuntÍputro yudhiîòhiraÉ |
nakulaÉ sahadevaïca sughoîamaàipuîpakau ||16||

Yatharth Geeta 16
to truth, blows on the conch which bears the name of Manipushpak.
Sages have described each breath as a precious ruby. ?What a pitythat we squander the jewels of our breath on idle gossip!? One kind ofsatsang is the moral discourse we hear from noble men, but the realspiritual discourse is internal. According to Lord Krishn, the Self aloneis true and eternal. True satsang comes about when the mind reinsitself in from all externals and dwells with the Self. This adherence totruth is cultivated by incessant reflection, meditation, and samadhi
7.
The more joy one feels in dwelling with the one reality, the more restraintone gains over each breath, the mind, and the instruments by whichobjects of sense affect the Self. The day they are totally restrained isthe day when we are absorbed in the ultimate essence. Providing, likea good instrument, harmonious accompaniment to the song of the Selfis true satsang.
The physical ruby is hard, but the jewel of breath is even more
tender than a flower. Flowers fall and wither soon after they bloom, andwe can never say that we shall live until the next breath. But if there istrue adherence to the Self, it leads us to realize the highest goal throughproviding control over each breath. There is nothing to proclaim beyondthis, although each device is helpful in traversing a certain stretch ofthe path of spiritual perfection
8. Sanjay further speaks on the subject:
17-18.?The Kashiraj, a great bowman, Shikhandi who dwells in the
Supreme Spirit, the unvanquished Dhristdyumn, Virat andSatyaki, Drupad and the sons of Draupadi, and Subhadra?sson of powerful arms (Abhimanyu), all blew, O lord of theearth, their own conches.??
keâeMÙe§e hejces<Jeeme: efMeKeC[er Ûe cenejLe:~
Oe=°Åegce>es efJeje?§e meelÙeefkeâ§eehejeefpele:~~17~~
õgheoes  õewheosÙee§e  meJe&Me:  he=efLeJeerheles~meewYeõ§e ceneyeeng: MeÈevoOceg: he=Lekeähe=Lekedâ~~18
7. Samadhi-- Perfect absorption of the mind and heart in the one contemplated
object, i.e. God.
8. State of detachment from the material universe and renunciation of worldly desires.kÂïyaïca parameîvÂsaÉ ïikhaàÅÍ ca mahÂrathaÉ |
dhçîòadyumno virÂòaïca sÂtyakiïcÂparÂjitaÉ ||17||
drupado draupadeyÂïca sarvaïaÉ pçthivÍpate |saubhadraïca mahÂbÂhuÉ ïaßkhÂndadhmuÉ pçthak pçthak||18

Chapter 1 17
The sacred city of Kashi is an emblem of the sacredness that
resides in the physical body. When a man withdraws his mind and
sense organs from all physical things and concentrates on the Selfwithin his body, he is privileged to merge with and dwell within God. Thebody which is capable of such a union is Kashi. The Supreme Spiritdwells in and pervades every single body. So ?parmeshwasah? heremeans dwelling in the Supreme Spirit rather than a ?mighty warrior.??
Shikhandi represents the rejection of shikha-sutr (sacred signs
traditionally worn by Hindus). There are people who believe they haveachieved renunciation just because they have got their heads shavedclean, cast away their sacred threads, and stopped lighting fire. Butthey are mistaken, for, as a matter of fact, shikha symbolizes a goalwhich has to be attained, and sutr the merits of action in a previousexistence (sanskar). The chain of sanskar is intact so long as God hasyet to be realized. How can there be true renunciation till the moment ofthat fulfillment? Till then we are only wayfarers. Delusion subsides onlywhen the desired God is attained and the merits of previous deeds arereduced to nothing. So it is Shikhandi who proves to be the undoing ofBheeshm, the image of delusion and self-deception. Shikhandirepresents the unique quality that is essential for the man who choosesthe path of reflection, a truly mighty fighter on his side.
Dhristdyumn, the steadfast mind that treasures faith in the
universal, immutable divinity, and Virat, capable of perceiving theomnipresence of the great God, are the main constituents of sacredexcellence. Satyaki is truthfulness. There can never be a fall from pietyas long as there is truthfulness or the desire to ponder over truth, italways protects us from being routed in the war between spirit andmatter.
Drupad, representing the ideal of steadfastness in the performance
of duty, the five sons of meditation-like Draupadi, symbols ofcompassion, tenderness, beauty, spiritual repose and consistency, whoare all great warriors providing assistance to the quest for the desiredgoal, and the long-armed Abhimanyu, all blow their separate conches.

Yatharth Geeta 18
me Iees<ees Oeele&je<?^eCeeb ùoÙeeefve JÙeoejÙeled~
veYe§e he=efLeJeeR ÛewJe legceguees JÙevegveeoÙeved~~19~~DeLe JÙeJeefmLeleevÂ°dJee Oeele&je°^evkeâefheOJepe:~
ØeJe=òes Mem$emecheeles Oeveg®ÅecÙe heeC[Je:~~20~~
ù<eerkesâMeb  leoe  JeekeäÙeefceoceen  cenerheles~Depeg&ve GJeeÛe-
mesveÙees®YeÙeesce&OÙes jLeb mLeeheÙe cesÓÛÙegle~~21~~?Arm? is a symbol of the sphere of action. When the mind is freed from
fear, its reach is immensely enlarged.
So Sanjay addresses Dhritrashtr and acquaints him with how the
chiefs of the Pandav army have made their proclamations with theirconches. Each one of them is a prerequisite of the skill of traversing acertain length of the way to spiritual emancipation. Their observance isnecessary and that is why they are enumerated in detail. However,there is, after these preliminary stages, that stretch of the path which isbeyond the perceiving mind and intellect. This is the length along whichone is enabled to travel only by the blessedness of the great God?sawakening within the Self. He stands up from the Self as vision and isself-evident.
19. ?The loud tumult, reverberating through heaven and earth,
pierced the hearts of Dhritrashtr?s sons.??The great tumult, echoing through heaven and earth, rends the
hearts of Dhritrashtr?s sons. There is the Pandav army, too, but the
hearts that are rent are only those of Dhritrashtr?s sons. When the mannaof Panchjanya, made up of true knowledge, realization of the infinite,destruction of evil, and affirmation of piety, begins to flow, the Kauravhearts with their unrighteous and outward-looking impulses cannot butbe rent. Their power wanes by and by. And if the process meets withsuccess, infatuation ceases to exist altogether.
20-22.?Then, O King, after viewing the sons of Dhritrashtr in array,
when the discharge of missiles was about to commence,
Kunti?s son (Arjun), whose ensign bore the image of Hanuman,raised his bow and spoke to Hrishikesh thus: ?O Achyut
sa ghoîo dhÂrtarÂîòrÂàaØ hçdayÂni vyadÂrayat |
nabhaïca pçthivÍØ caiva tumulo vyanunÂdayan ||19||atha vyavasthitÂndçîòvÂ dhÂrtarÂîòrÂnkapidhvajaÉ |
pravçtte ïastrasampÂte dhanurudyamya pÂàÅavaÉ ||20||
hçîÍkeïaØ tadÂ vÂkyamidamÂha mahÍpate |arjuna uvÂca-
senayorubhayormadhye rathaØ sthÂpaya me'cyuta ||21||

Chapter 1 19
(Krishn), keep my chariot between the two armies so that I
may watch those who are formed up for combat and knowwhom I have to fight in the ensuing battle.? ??
Sanjay, an epitome of self restraint, endeavours to enlighten the
mind lying under a pall of ignorance by pointing out that apart from the
other exemplary captains of the Pandav army there is the Hanuman-ensign of Arjun. Hanuman, a symbol of true renunciation.Disenchantment with the world and the desire to renounce it are themark of Arjun?s battle-standard. Some interpreters have named thisstandard ?monkey-ensign? because of its frenzied fluttering. But this isunacceptable, for the primate exhibited on the ensign is no commonmonkey but Hanuman himself who has risen above all  distinctions. Tohim honour and dishonour are the same. Giving up lust for materialobjects which have been heard or seen, of worldly objects and sensualpleasures, is renunciation. So, after having seen Dhritrashtr?s sonsarrayed just when missiles are about to be launched, Arjun, whosedistinctive motto is renunciation, lifts his bow and speaks to Hrishikesh,the lord of senses and knower of the mysteries of the heart, addressinghim as the ?infallible.? He requests his charioteer to station the chariotbetween the two armies. His words, however, are not words of commandto a charioteer, but a prayer by a devotee to the worshiped one, anaccomplished teacher. But why does he want Lord Krishn to park thechariot?
Arjun wants to ascertain well who the warriors intent upon battle
are, whom he has to fight in this business of warfare.
23. ?Since I wish to observe those who have assembled here to
fight for pleasing Dhritrashtr?s wicked-minded son
(Duryodhan) in the battle.??
ÙeeJeosleeefVejer#esÓnb ÙeesæÏkeâeceeveJeefmLeleeved~
kewâce&Ùee men ÙeesæJÙeceefmcevjCemecegÅeces~~22~~
ÙeeslmÙeceeveeveJes#esÓnb Ùe SlesÓ$e meceeielee:~
Oeele&je°^mÙe ogyeg&æsÙeg&æs efØeÙeefÛekeâer<e&Je:~~23~~
yÂvadetÂnnirÍkîe'haØ yoddhukÂmÂnavasthitÂn |
kairmayÂ saha yoddhavyamasminraàasamudyame ||22||
yotsyamÂnÂnavekîe'haØ ya ete'tra samÂgatÂÉ |
dhÂrtarÂîòrasya durbuddheryuddhe priyacikÍrîavaÉ ||23||

Yatharth Geeta 20
Arjun wants the chariot to be parked in front of the Kaurav so that
he may see the kings, desirous of battle, who have joined the evil-
minded Duryodhan for the sake of his happiness-for Duryodhan whorepresents excessive attachment. Arjun wishes to observe well thekings who have assembled to fight in the war for the cause of infatuation.
24-25.??Thus addressed by Gudakesh
9,  O descendant of Bharat
(Dhritrashtr), Hrishikesh parked the unique chariot between
the two armies, in front of Bheeshm, Dron, and all the otherkings, and said, ?Behold, O son of Pritha
10 (Arjun), the
assembled Kuru.? ??
Sanjay informs Dhritrashtr how on being requested by Arjun, who
has mastered sleep, Lord Krishn, who knows all that is to know of the
mind and heart, parks the chariot of unexcelled beauty in the midst ofall the kings who have staked out claims on the earth which is the bodyin macrocosm, and asks Parth to behold the assembled Kaurav. The?excellent? chariot in question is made of neither gold nor silver, nor ofany material substance. Excellence is defined in this world in terms ofits agreeableness or disagreeableness to the mortal body. But such aview is misleading, for that alone is excellence which is always onewith the real, the Self, and which has no unrighteousness or impurityabout it.
meÀeÙe GJeeÛe-
SJecegòeâes ù<eerkesâMees ieg[ekesâMesve Yeejle~
mesveÙees®YeÙeesce&OÙes mLeeheefÙelJee jLeesòececed~~24~~Yeer<ceõesCeØecegKele: meJex<eeb Ûe ceneref#eleeced~
GJeeÛe heeLe& heMÙewleevmeceJesleevkegâ¤efveefle~~25~~
9. One who has conquered sleep.
10. ?Pritha? is another name of Kunti.saájaya uvÂca-
evamukto hçîÍkeïo guÅÂkeïena bhÂrata |
senayorubhayormadhye sthÂpayitvÂ rathottamam ||24||bhÍîmadroàapramukhataÉ sarveîÂØ ca mahÍkîitÂm |
uvÂca pÂrtha païyaitÂnsamavetÂnkuröniti ||25||

Chapter 1 21
26-28/1. ?Parth then saw, mustered in the two armies, uncles,
granduncles, teachers, maternal uncles, brothers, sons,
grandsons and friends, as well as fathers-in-law and well-wishers. Seeing all these kinsmen assembled together andoverwhelmed by intense pity, he spoke thus in great sorrow:?
Parth, the perfect marksman who has made a chariot of his
earthformed body
11, looks at the army and sees his kinsmen. What is
noteworthy is that in the two armies he sees only his own family, the
families of maternal uncles, and of fathers-in-law, friends, and teachers.According to scholarly estimates, the two armies of the Mahabharatconsisted of eighteen akshauhini chariots, elephants, horses, and footsoldiers, which is approximately 6500 million, a very large number indeed.It hardly needs saying how the world is faced today with numerousgrave problems of food and housing on account of rising population. Sowhat are we to make of it when we are told that just three or four familiesof Arjun?s kinsmen are so large in number? Is it possible for any familyto be so huge? The answer must be in the negative. So what we havehere is a portrayal not of physical armies but of the sphere of the mindand heart. Overcome with deep compassion, when he sees all hiskinsmen mustered for battle, Arjun speaks in grief. He grieves becausehe sees that he has to fight his own family.
le$eeheMÙeeflmLeleevheeLe&: efhele¸veLe efheleeceneved~
DeeÛeeÙee&vceelegueevYeüele¸vheg$eevheew$eevmeKeeRmleLee~~26~~
ÕeMegjevmegùo§ewJe    mesveÙees®YeÙeesjefhe~
leevmeceer#Ùe me keâewvlesÙe: me Jee&vyevOetveJeefmLeleeved~~27
ke=âheÙee  hejÙeeefJe<?es  efJe<eeroefVeoceyeÇJeerled~
11. In the Upanishad Katha, the King of Death says to Nachiketa, ?Know that the body
is the chariot, the Self the rider, the intellect is the charioteer, and the mind the
reins.??tatrÂpaïyatsthitÂnpÂrthaÉ piténatha pitÂmahÂn |
ÂcÂryÂnmÂtulÂnbhrÂténputrÂnpautrÂnsakhÍØstathÂ||26
ïvaïurÂnsuhçdaïcaiva senayorubhayorapi |
tÂnsamÍkîya sa kaunteyaÉ sarvÂnbandhönavasthitÂn||27kçpayÂ parayÂviîòo viîÍdannidamabravÍt |

Yatharth Geeta 22
28/2-30.  ?Arjun said, ?Seeing these kith and kin, mustered with the
purpose of waging war, O Krishn, my limbs grow weak, my
mouth is dry, my body trembles, my hair stands on end, theGandeev (Arjun?s bow) slips from my hand, my skin isburning all over, I am unable to stand, and my mind isbewildered.??
Looking at the gathering of his kinsmen, Arjun is unnerved. His
body has grown inert, his mouth is parched, his limbs tremble, and his
hair stands erect. The Gandeev falls from his hand and his skin is hot.He is sorely distressed by the prospect of a war in which his own kinsmenface him. He is confused. He bewails that he cannot even stand properlyand look ahead.
31. ?I see, O Madhav (Krishn), inauspicious portents, and I can
perceive no prefix in the idea of slaughtering kinsmen in the
battle.??
Arjun sees adverse signs of the impending war. He does not see
anything propitious in the slaying of his own family. How can any good
result from such killing?
32. ??I aspire, O Krishn, after neither victory nor a realm and its
pleasures for of what avail is sovereignty to us, O Govind
(Krishn), or enjoyment, or even life itself??
Depe&gve GJeeÛe-
Â°dJesceb mJepeveb ke=â<Ce ÙegÙeglmegb mecegheefmLeleced~~28~~
meeroefvle cece iee$eeefCe cegKeb Ûe heefjMeg<Ùeefle~
JesheLeg§e  Mejerjs  ces  jescen<e&§e  peeÙeles~~29~~ieeC[erJeb ?ebmeles nmleeòJekeäÛewJe heefjo¢eles~
ve Ûe MekeäveescÙeJemLeelegb YeüceleerJe Ûe ces ceve:~~30~~
efveefceòeeefve Ûe heMÙeeefce efJehejerleeefve kesâMeJe~ve Ûe ßesÙeesÓvegheMÙeeefce nlJee mJepeveceenJes~~31~~
ve keâe*d#es efJepeÙeb ke=â<Ce ve Ûe jepÙeb megKeeefve Ûe~
eEkeâ vees jepÙesve ieesefJevo eEkeâ YeesiewpeeaefJelesve Jee~~32~~arjuna uvÂca-
dçîòtvemaØ svajanaØ kçîàa yuyutsuØ samavasthitam||28
sÍdanti mama gÂtrÂài mukhaØ ca pariïuîyati |
vepathuïca ïarÍre me romaharîaïca jÂyate ||29||gÂàÅÍvaØ sraØsate hastÂttvakcaiva paridahyate |
na ca ïaknomyavasthÂtuØ bhramatÍva ca me manaÉ||30
nimittÂni ca païyÂmi viparÍtÂni keïava |na ca ïreyo'nupaïyÂmi hatvÂ svajanamÂhave ||31||
na kÂßkîe vijayaØ kçîàa na ca rÂjyaØ sukhÂni ca |
kiØ no rÂjyena govinda kiØ bhogairjÍvitena vÂ ||32||

Chapter 1 23
Arjun?s whole family is on the brink of war. So he does not wish
for either victory or the kingdom that this victory may bring him, or even
the pleasures of that kingdom. Of what use will be a kingdom or enjoymentor life to him? He then states the reasons for his reluctance to fight inthe war:
33. ?They for whose sake we crave for a kingdom, pleasures,
and enjoyments are formed up here, putting at stake both
their life and wealth.??
The family, for whose sake Arjun has desired the happiness of a
kingdom and other pleasures, is now mustered on the battlefield
despairing of its life. If he had desired a kingdom, it was for them. If hehad hungered for the pleasures of wealth and indulgence, it was becausehe wanted to enjoy it along with his kith and kin. But he now desiresneither a kingdom nor pleasures, nor enjoyment, because he sees hiskinsmen standing against him without any hope of life. Whatever hehad desired was dear to him for their sake. But he does not need thesethings if he has to get them at the cost of his kinsmen. Desires remainas long as there are family ties. Even a poor man having only a wretchedhovel to live in will not accept an empire extending over the entire lengthand breadth of the world if for this he has to kill his family, friends, andkinsmen. Arjun says the same thing. He is fond of pleasures and heloves victory, but of what good can they be to him if the very people forwhom he desires these rewards are no longer with him? Of what usewill enjoyment of pleasures be in their absence? After all, who are thepeople he will have to kill in the war?
Ùes<eeceLex keâe*def#eleb vees jepÙeb Yeesiee: megKeeefve Ûe~
le FcesÓJeefmLelee Ùegæs ØeeCeebmlÙekeälJee Oeveeefve Ûe~~33
yeîÂmarthe kÂßkîitaØ no rÂjyaØ bhogÂÉ sukhÂni ca |
ta ime'vasthitÂ yuddhe prÂàÂØstyaktvÂ dhanÂni ca||33

Yatharth Geeta 24
34-35. ?Teachers, uncles, nephews as well as granduncles,
maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grandnephews, brothers-in-
law, and other kinsmen. Though they might slay me, I yethave no desire to kill them, O Madhusudan (Krishn), even fora realm made up of the three worlds, still less for this earthalone.??
The people to be slain are Arjun?s own flesh and blood. As he
tells Lord Krishn sorrowfully, he does not wish to harm his kinsmen
although in doing so he might lose his own life at their hands, even forruling over all the three worlds.
In an army formed of approximately 6500 million men Arjun can
see only his own family. Who really are these innumerable kinsmen?Arjun verily is an image of tender devotion. His dilemma is the one thatfaces every devotee when he sets out on the path of worshipful adoration(bhajan). It is everyone?s desire that he should attain the highest realityby reverence and worship. But he is filled with despair when, under anexperienced and accomplished teacher?s tutelage, he comes tounderstand the fundamental nature of the conflict between the materialbody and the divine Self, and realizes against whom he has to wage hiswar. He wishes that his father?s family, his wife?s family, his maternaluncle?s family, people who love him, friends, and teachers should alllive with him in happiness, and that, while providing for all of them, heshould also attain to God. So he is confused when confronted with thefact that in order to forge ahead in his task of worship he has to abandonhis family. Because of his attachment, the prospect of severing thebonds of kinship confuses and unnerves him.
DeeÛeeÙee&: efhelej: heg$eemleLewJe Ûe efheleecene:~
ceeleguee: ÕeMegje: heew$ee: MÙeeuee: mecyeefvOevemleLee~~34
SleeVe nvlegefceÛÚeefce IveleesÓefhe ceOegmetove~
Deefhe $ewueeskeäÙejepÙemÙe nslees: efkebâ veg cenerke=âles~~35~~
ÂcÂryÂÉ pitaraÉ putrÂstathaiva ca pitÂmahÂÉ |
mÂtulÂÉ ïvaïurÂÉ pautrÂÉ ïyÂlÂÉ sambandhinastatha||34
etÂnna hantumicchÂmi ghnato'pi madhusödana |
api trailokyarÂjyasya hetoÉ kiØ nu mahÍkçte ||35||

Chapter 1 25
My noble teacher12, the Revered Paramhans Parmanand Ji used
to say, ?To be a sadhu (ascetic) is the same as to die.? Even if the
universe has beings whom he regards as living, there is no one whomthe ascetic can regard as belonging to his own family. As long as thereis such a one, the feeling of attachment remains. As for this weakness,the one who is striving to realize his Self is a winner only when herejects and destroys his attachment as well as all the other associatedfeelings. What is this world but an extension of the ties of attachment?What is there in it for us in the absence of these bonds? The world aswe know it is only an extension of the mind. Yogeshwar Krishn hasportrayed the same extension of the mind as the world. The man whohas withstood and subdued its power has conquered the whole universe.Lord Krishn tells Arjun in the nineteenth verse of Chapter five, ?Thewhole cosmos is overcome even in this world by those whose mindsrepose in equality.? Such a state of calm, of mental equipoise, is madepossible by the complete annihilation of ego. This frees the mind fromits self-centered subservience to the material world. After ego has ceasedto exist, only the Self remains in a pure state. So this is the way toattainment of salvation and final beatitude (brahmavastha) whichtranscends the transitory life of nature. It is thus that those who haverealized this state are not subject to the limitations of the material world.
It is not that only Arjun is confused. Affectionate attachment
resides in every heart, and everyone with such a feeling is in a state ofconfusion. Kith and kin are always in the foreground of a man?sconsciousness. At the beginning he believes that his sacred adorationwill be helpful in his endeavour to make his kinsmen happy. He looksforward to enjoying his acquisitions along with them. But what shall hedo with the happiness if his own people are no longer with him? So is itwith Arjun. His vision has so far been limited to the pleasures that canbe had from a kingdom and heaven. He has till now envisaged the
12. The author?s teacher-preceptor. Paramhans is an honorific title used for an ascetic
of the highest order, one who dwells in a state of final attainment (God) with perfect
control of his senses by formless meditation.

Yatharth Geeta 26
ultimate happiness in terms of heaven and a realm composed of the
three worlds. If there is any reality beyond this, Arjun yet has no inklingof it.
36. ?What happiness can we have, O Janardan
13  (Krishn), from
slaying these sons of Dhritrashtr? Only sin will fall to our lot
if we kill even these wicked men.?
What happiness can Arjun gain from killing Dhritrashtr?s sons?
Dhritrashtr denotes the ?insolent or profligate nation,? and born from it is
Duryodhan, the image of infatuation. But shall even the slaying of suchan evil kinsman make Arjun and Lord Krishn happy? The Kaurav areunrighteous, but the Pandav will be only guilty of sin if they kill them.We call men evildoers if they adopt impious ways for their livelihood. Infact, however, the worst felons are those who put obstructions in theway of the Self. The gravest offenders in this respect are lust, wrath,avarice, and inordinate attachment which obstruct one?s realization ofthe Self.
37. ?So it is not for us to kill Dhritrashtr?s sons, for how indeed
can we be happy, O Madhav (Krishn), if we slaughter our
own kinsmen??
Is it not surprising that the Kaurav are at this moment seen as
kith and kin? Didn?t they come to the battlefield as foes? In truth, physical
relationship arises from ignorance. He is my maternal uncle; here is mywife?s family; this is the community of my own people. What are allthese, but ignorance? We have people who are affectionate to us and
efvenlÙe Oeele&je°^eVe: keâe Øeerefle: mÙeeppeveeo&ve~
heehecesJeeßeÙesomceevnlJewleeveeleleeefÙeve: ~~36~~lemceeVeene& JeÙeb nvlegb Oeele&je°^evmJeyeevOeJeeved~
mJepeveb efn keâLeb nlJee megefKeve: mÙeece ceeOeJe~~37
13. Yet another epithet of Lord Krishn, meaning ?one who is worshiped-solicited for
prosperity and emancipation and all these are attainable from him, one who is
compassionate to mankind is Janardan.?nihatya dhÂrtarÂîòrÂnnaÉ kÂ prÍtiÉ syajjanÂrdana |
pÂpamevÂïrayedasmÂnhatvaitÂnÂtatÂyinaÉ ||36||tasmÂnnÂrhÂ vayaØ hantuØ dhÂrtarÂîòrÂnsvabÂndhavÂn|
svajanaØ hi kathaØ hatvÂ sukhinaÉ syÂma mÂdhava||37

Chapter 1 27
we have our family, and we have our world, but all these we have only
as long as there is attachment. All such ties are demolished when thereis no attachment. That is why even sworn enemies now appear to Arjunas kinsmen. He asks Lord Krishn how they can be happy by killing theirkinsmen. Without ignorance and attachment the idea of family cannotexist. Paradoxically, however, it is this ignorance that also provides theinitial urge for knowledge. Some great men like Bhartrihari and Tulsidaswere driven to renunciation by their spouses, whereas there are examplesof many others who have gone the same way because of theirdisillusionment with the conduct of a stepmother.
38-39. ?Although, with their minds vitiated by greed, they (the
Kaurav) have no awareness of the evil they do in destroying
families and in being treacherous to friends, why should we,O Janardan, who know that it is evil to destroy families, notturn away from the sinful act??
Straying from righteousness because of their arrogance and
avarice, the Kaurav are blind to the sin they commit by destroying
families and practising treachery against friends. This is their error. Butwhy, Arjun wishes to know from Lord Krishn, should they themselves,knowing the evils of destroying families, not desist from the crime?What deserves special notice here is Arjun?s belief that not only he, butLord Krishn, too, is about to make the same error. So he also indirectlyaccuses Lord Krishn. Every novice taking refuge in an accomplishedteacher reasons in the same way. Arjun is under the impression thatperhaps the problem that is bothering him has not yet occurred to LordKrishn. All the same, they are both reasonable men and it is required ofthem to think of the evil consequences of destroying a family.
ÙeÅehÙesles ve heMÙeefvle ueesYeeshenleÛesleme:~
kegâue#eÙeke=âleb oes<eb efce$eõesns Ûe heelekeâced~~38~~
keâLeb ve %esÙecemceeefYe: heeheeomceeefVeJee|lelegced~kegâue#eÙeke=âleb  oes<eb  ØeheMÙeefÆpe&veeo&ve~~39~~
yadyapyete na païyanti lobhopahatacetasaÉ |
kulakîayakçtaØ doîaØ mitradrohe ca pÂtakam ||38||
kathaØ na jáeyamasmÂbhiÉ pÂpÂdasmÂnnivartitum |kulakîayakçtaØ doîaØ prapaïyadbhirjanÂrdana ||39||

Yatharth Geeta 28
40. ?In case of the destruction of a family its eternal sacred
traditions are lost, and impiety afflicts the whole family with
the loss of its values.??
Until now Arjun has viewed family traditions as the eternal
(Sanatan) Dharm. And he also believes that with the loss of these
traditions, families are laden with sin.
41. ?When sin prevails, O Krishn, women of the family stray from
virtue, and when they are unchaste, O descendant of the
?Vrishnis, (Varshneya: Krishn), there is generated an unholymixture of classes (varnsankar).??
When unrighteous ways dominate a family, its women lose their
chastity and there arises an intermingling of different classes, of
incompatible cultures and ways of living. According to Arjun, this sinfulintermingling occurs when women lose their virtue. But Lord Krishncontradicts this: ?I am fully contented in the Self and there is nothingmore precious which is beyond my reach. Yet I continue to practicemeditation and renunciation, and urge others to the same. But theseare only means and not the goal, and when the goal is achieved whocares for the means? So if the achiever such as I neglects the means,his followers of an inferior merit will emulate him and they, too, will giveup the required means. Confused and misled from the path of Self-realization, they then perish.? Lacking in true achievement, they onlyswagger emptily as if they were perfect. This imitation creates a chaos.There remains no distinction between the deserving and the undeserving.This confusion is varnsankar and the teacher himself is held responsiblefor this disorder. That is why an ideal teacher always teaches by hisown conduct.
kegâue#eÙes ØeCeMÙeefvle kegâueOecee&: meveelevee:~
Oecex ve°s kegâueb ke=âlmveceOeceexÓefYeYeJelÙegle~~40~~
DeOecee&efYeYeJeelke=â<Ce Øeog<Ùeefvle kegâueef?eÙe:~?eer<eg og°emeg Jee<CexÙe peeÙeles JeCe&me¿j:~~41~~
kulakîaye praàaïyanti kuladharmÂÉ sanÂtanÂÉ |
dharme naîòe kulaØ kçtsnamadharmo'bhibhavatyuta ||40||
adharmÂbhibhavÂtkçîàa praduîyanti kulastriyaÉ |strÍîu duîòÂsu vÂrîàeya jÂyate varàasaßkaraÉ ||41||

Chapter 1 29
For a while, however, he chooses to remain silent, and Arjun
goes on with his elaboration of the evils of varnsankar.
42. ?The unholy intermingling of classes condemns the destroyer
of the family as well as the family itself to hell, for their
ancestors, deprived of the offerings of obsequial cakes ofrice and water libations, fall (from their heavenly abode).??
It is a quality of varnsankar to dispatch families and their
destroyers to hell. Divested of obsequial gifts of rice cakes, their
forefathers also lose their heavenly home. The present is destroyed,the ancestors of the past fall, and the posterity to come will also descendto hell. Not only this, but-
43. ?The sin committed by destroyers of families, which causes
an intermingling of classes, puts to an end the timeless dharm
of both caste and family.??
According to Arjun, the evils of varnsankar destroy the traditions
of both families and their destroyers. He holds the view that family
traditions are changeless and eternal. But Lord Krishn refutes this laterby asserting that Self alone is the changeless and eternal SanatanDharm
14. Before a man has realized the essence of this Sanatan Dharm,
he gives credence to some tradition or the other. Such is Arjun?s beliefat the moment, but in Lord Krishn?s view it is a mere delusion.
me¿jes vejkeâeÙewJe kegâueIveeveeb kegâuemÙe Ûe~
heleefvle efhelejes ¢es<eeb ueghleefheC[esokeâef?eâÙee:~~42~~
oes<ewjslew:  kegâueIveeveeb  JeCe&me¿jkeâejkewâ:~GlmeeÅevles peeefleOecee&: kegâueOecee&§e MeeÕelee:~~43~~
14. Sanatan is ?the eternal.? Sanatan Dharm may thus be interpreted approximately
as that immutable, eternal, divine principle that animates all things and beings,
and which enables them to realize themselves. Sanatan is also the God almightyand virtues that reveal him. Values that reveal him within the heart are Sanatan
Dharm.saßkaro narakÂyaiva kulaghnÂnÂØ kulasya ca |
patanti pitaro hyeîaØ luptapißÅodakakriyÂÉ ||42||
doîairetaiÉ kulaghnÂnÂØ varàasaßkarakÂrakaiÉ |utsÂdyante jÂtidharmÂÉ kuladharmÂïca ïÂïvatÂÉ ||43||

Yatharth Geeta 30
44. ?We have heard, O Janardan, that hell is indeed the miserable
habitat, for an infinite time, of men, the traditions of whose
families have been destroyed.?
Men whose family traditions are destroyed have to dwell in hell
endlessly. What is significant though is that Arjun has only heard so.
As he believes, with the destruction of a family, not only its traditionsbut also its changeless, everlasting dharm is destroyed. He thus equatestraditions with Sanatan Dharm. It is well known, he says, how a manhas to suffer in hell for the loss of his dharm.  But he has only heard so:not seen, but only heard of it.
45. ?Tempted by the pleasures of temporal power, alas, what a
heinous crime have we resolved to commit by killing our
own kith and kin!?
How regrettable that although possessed of wisdom, they are yet
determined to commit a grave sin by being intent upon killing their own
family because of greed of regal power and its pleasures. At this pointArjun regards his knowledge as in no way less than that of Lord Krishn.All seekers, as it has already been said, feel thus at the outset. Accordingto Mahatma Buddh, so long as a man has only partial knowledge heregards himself as a repository of great wisdom, but as he begins tolearn the second half of the knowledge he has to acquire, he regardshimself as a great fool. Arjun considers himself a wise man in the sameway. He takes the liberty of persuading Lord Krishn that it is simply notpossible that their sinful act can have any propitious outcome, and alsothat their resolve to destroy their family is motivated by sheer greed ofsovereignty and its pleasures. They are really committing a terribleerror. Convinced that the error is not only his, he has a dig at Lord
GlmeVekegâueOecee&Ceeb ceveg<ÙeeCeeb peveeo&ve~
vejkesâÓefveÙeleb Jeemees YeJeleerlÙevegMegßegce~~44~~Denes yele cenlheeheb keâlegË JÙeJeefmelee JeÙeced~
ÙeõepÙemegKeueesYesve nvlegb mJepevecegÅelee:~~45~~
utsannakuladharmÂàÂØ manuîyÂàÂØ janÂrdana |
narake'niyataØ vÂso bhavatÍtyanuïuïruma ||44||aho bata mahatpÂpaØ kartuØ vyavasitÂ vayam |
yadrÂjyasukhalobhena hantuØ svajanamudyatÂÉ ||45||

Chapter 1 31
Krishn when he remarks that the error is also his. And, at last, he
delivers his final view of the matter:
46. ?I shall indeed prefer the prospect of being slain by the armed
sons of Dhritrashtr while (I am myself) unarmed and
unresisting.??
His death at the hands of Dhritrashtr?s armed sons, while he
himself is unarmed and unresisting, will be according to Arjun a fortunate
event. History will then remember him as a magnanimous man who hadaverted a war by sacrificing his own life. People forsake their lives forthe happiness of tender, innocent children so that the family may thrive.People go abroad and live in luxurious mansions, but after two daysthey begin to pine for their discarded hovels. Such is the strength ofattachment. It is behind Arjun?s feeling that it will be propitious even ifhe is killed unresisting by the armed sons of Dhritrashtr, for it will ensurethe children of the family a prosperous and happy life.
47. ?Sanjay said, ?Speaking thus and smitten by grief, in the midst
of the battlefield, Arjun put aside his bow and arrows, and
sat down in the chariot.? ??
In other words, Arjun withdraws from the conflict between the
physical body-the sphere of action-and the Self within with his awareness
of God.
???????????????
The Geeta is an investigation of the war of kshetr-kshetragya: of
the conflict between the material body, engaged in action, and theaccomplished Soul that is ever conscious of his oneness with theSupreme Spirit. A song of revelation, it strives to demonstrate what
Ùeefo ceeceØeleerkeâejceMe?eb Me?eheeCeÙe:~
Oeele&je°^e jCes nvÙegmlevces #escelejb YeJesled~~46~~
meÀeÙe GJeeÛe-SJecegkeälJeepeg&ve: meÈ?es jLeeshemLe GheeefJeMeled~
efJeme=pÙe meMejb Ûeeheb MeeskeâmebefJeie>ceeveme:~~47~~yadi mÂmapratÍkÂramaïastraØ ïastrapÂàayaÉ |
dhÂrtarÂîòrÂ raàe hanyustanme kîemataraØ bhavet ||46||
saájaya uvÂca-evamuktvÂrjunaÉ saßnkhye rathopastha upÂviïat |
visçjya saïaraØ cÂpaØ ïokasaØvignamÂnasaÉ ||47||

Yatharth Geeta 32
God must be in all his divine splendour. The sphere that the song
celebrates is a battlefield: the body with its dual, opposed impulsesthat compose the ?Dharmkshetr? and the ?Kurukshetr.
The first chapter, as we have seen, elaborates the respective
structure and base of the strength that characterize the adversaries.The sounding of conches proclaims their valour as well as intentions.There is then a review of the armies that are, to fight in the war. Theirnumerical strength is estimated at approximately 6500 million, but thenumber is really infinite. Nature embodies two points of view, relevantto the opposed impulses that clash on the field of action. There is firstthe inward looking mind that always aims at realization of the Self andlooks up to the adored God. On the other hand, there is the outwardlooking mind, preoccupied with the material world and dominated byunrighteous impulses. The first enables the self to be absorbed in themost sublime dharm that is embodied in God, whereas the secondcontrives illusion (maya) by virtue of which the material world is takenas really existent and distinct from the Supreme Spirit. The initial stepof the spiritual wayfarer is to seek moral excellence so as to subdueunrighteous impulses. Subsequently, with the perception of and unionwith the immutable, eternal God, even the need for righteousness isdone away with and the final outcome of the war between matter andspirit is revealed.
Looking at the armies on the battlefield of life we see our own
families, and they have to be destroyed. The world is but an extensionof attachments. Attachment to the family proves an obstacle in theprimary stage of the worshiper?s devotion to the desired goal. He isshaken when he discovers that he shall have to part with his near anddear ones and treat them as though they had never existed. He findsnothing but unpropitious harm in his act of destroying his own people.Like Arjun he, looks for an escape into prevailing traditions. Arjun saysthat family traditions are the Sanatan Dharm. Destruction of family andcaste traditions by war is thus destruction of the eternal dharm itself.And when dharm is lost, women of the family grow unchaste and there

Chapter 1 33
is a sinful intermingling of classes which must drive both the family and
its destroyers to hell for an indefinite time. With his limited knowledgeand wisdom, Arjun is desperate to protect the family traditions which heregards as Sanatan Dharm. So he pleads with Lord Krishn and wishesto be enlightened on why they (Lord Krishn and he), men of sagacity,should be bent upon committing the heinous sin of destroying theirfamily. According to his view of the issue at hand, even Lord Krishn isabout to become an accessory to the crime. Finally, he assertsadamantly that in order to save himself from the sin he shall not fight.Saying this he sinks despairingly in the rear of the chariot. In otherwords, he turns his back on the precious enterprise of the perennialconflict that rages between matter and spirit, between godly and ungodlyimpulses, between forces that drag a man down to gross nature andforces that elevate and finally take the Soul to the Supreme God.
Commentators have called this first chapter of the Geeta ?Arjun
Vishad Yog.? ?Vishad? is grief. Arjun is a symbol of tender, affectionatedevotion. Grief is the motive as well as instrument of the devotee whois concerned about the preservation of the Sanatan Dharm. Such wasthe sorrow of Manu. Goswami Tulsidas has said, ??Full of grief is myheart since I have only led my life without love of God.? A man sinksinto grief because of irresolution. Arjun is apprehensive of varnsankar,of intermingling of classes, for such hybridization only leads todamnation. He also grieves because he fears for the safety of SanatanDharm. So the title ?Sanshay Vishad Yog,? is appropriate for the chapter.
Thus concludes the First Chapter, in the Upanishad of the
Shreemadbhagwadgeeta, on the Knowledge of the Supreme
Spirit, the Science of Yog, and the Dialogue between
Lord Krishn and Arjun, entitled:
 ?Sanshay Vishad Yog??,
or
??The Yog of Irresolution and Grief??.

Yatharth Geeta 34
Thus concludes the Most Revered Paramhans Paramanand Ji?s
disciple Swami Adgadanand?s exposition of the First Chapter of
the Shreemadbhagwadgeeta in ??Yatharth Geeta??, entitled:
 ?Sanshay Vishad Yog??.
HARI OM TAT SAT

Chapter 2 35
CHAPTER 2
CURIOSITY
ABOUT ACTION
In the nature of a preface, Chapter 1 presents the seeker?s doubts
and confusions. The participants in the war include all of the Kaurav
and Pandav, but Arjun alone is subject to misgivings. However, Arjunis the very embodiment of devotion as a wayfarer on the path of spiritualquest. It is his love for God that inspires him to get ready for the warbetween matter and spirit. The initial stage is thus of love, adoration.My Revered teacher used to say, ?Believe that adoration of the SupremeSpirit has commenced when, even while one is leading the life of ahouseholder, there are signs of weariness and tears, and sentiment sopowerful that it chokes the throat.?? Manifold strands are entwined inlove: of dharm, precept, restraint, pious association, and sentiment.
In the first stage of spiritual seeking, attachment to the family
looms as an obstacle. At the outset everyone wishes to achieve theultimate reality, but the worshiper is overtaken by despair when herealizes that after going a certain length of the way he will have to severall his ties of attachment to the family. So he learns to be contentedwith whatever customs he had followed earlier. He even cites prevailingcustoms to justify his infatuation, just as Arjun does when he insiststhat family rites are Sanatan Dharm. The war will cause the extinctionof the Sanatan Dharm itself and, along with that, destruction of familiesand loss of civilized ways. Far from being an independent view of Arjun,his ideas only reflect some inherited creeds he had acquired earlierbefore approaching an accomplished teacher such as Lord Krishn.

Yatharth Geeta 36
Mired in these traditions, men devise numerous religions, sects,
groups small and large, and castes beyond reckoning. Some press the
nose while others pierce their ears, while yet others lose their dharmbecause they are touched by someone, or because their food and drinkare defiled. Is it just to blame the so called ?untouchables? or non-Hindus for this state of affairs? By no means. The blame should ratherbe apportioned among those who propagate delusions in the name ofdharm. As for us who listen to them, we are blind victims of what arebut misguided customs, and so we, too, have to bear part of the blame.
In Mahatma Buddh?s time there was a sect called Kesh- Kambal
1,
the members of which regarded the practice of growing hair, so that itcould be used like a blanket, as a standard of perfection. There havebeen some who thought it pious to live like cows, while others havelived and conducted themselves in the manner of dogs. But all thesewere only stupid customs that have nothing to do with awareness ofGod. There were schisms and foolish customs in the past, and they arewith us even today. There were also divisions and stupid customs inLord Krishn?s time, and Arjun is a victim of some of them. This is seenfrom his four arguments, namely that war destroys the eternal SanatanDharm and that it produces varnsankar, an unholy intermingling ofdisparate classes and ways of life. Obsequial offerings of deceasedancestors will cease and that we shall by being engaged in destroyingour race, invite great curses on us. Thereupon, Yogeshwar Krishnspeaks to him.
1. ?Sanjay said, ?To him (Arjun), whose eyes were brimming
with tears of grief because he was overcome by pity,
Madhusudan spoke thus.???
To Arjun, his eyes filled with tears of sorrow and profound agitation,
Madhusudan, the destroyer of arrogance, speaks:
me_peÙe GJeeÛe-
leb leLee ke=âheÙeeefJe°ceßeghetCee&kegâues#eCeced~
efJe<eerovleefceob JeekeäÙecegJeeÛe ceOegmetove:~~1~~
1. Literally translated, Kesh-Kambal is ?blanket of hair??.saájaya uvÂca-
taØ tathÂ kçpayÂviîòamaïrupöràÂkulekîaàam|viîÍdantamidaØ vÂkyamuvÂca madhusödanaÉ||1||

Chapter 2 37
2. ??The Lord said, ?From what cause, O Arjun, does this unmanly
(un-Arjun-like), heaven-barring, and shameful despair come
over you at this perilous spot????
Lord Krishn uses the term ?visham? for the place where Arjun and
he are at the time. Besides meaning ?difficult? or ?dangerous?, the word
also means ?unique? or ?unequalled.? So Lord Krishn really wishes toknow that which has caused spiritual ignorance (agyan) in Arjun in thisunusual, unparalleled setting. The setting is one, the like of which, canbe found nowhere else in the entire world, because it is the sphere ofspiritual striving towards an unworldly, celestial goal. In such a universaland undisputed setting, how has spiritual ignorance come over Arjun?Why does Lord Krishn call Arjun?s views spiritual ignorance? Has Arjunnot said categorically that it is his heartfelt wish to defend SanatanDharm? Is it spiritual ignorance to be resolved, body and soul, to protectwhat Arjun believes to be the immutable, eternal dharm? According toLord Krishn it is so, for it has not been the practice of those who trulydeserve to be called men. Neither does it provide access to heaven. Itis also not conducive to glory. The one who keeps firmly to the path ofrighteousness is an Arya. In Indian scriptures, instead of referring toany race or stock, ?Arya? denotes an exceptionally cultivated man whoadheres scrupulously to dharm. If dying for one?s family were not aninstance of ignorance, Lord Krishn adds, sages would have practicedit. Had family traditions been the ultimate reality, they would have beenused as a ladder for climbing up to heaven and salvation. When Meerasang her songs of divine adoration, people declared her insane and hermother-in-law condemned her as a destroyer of the family. But no onetoday remembers the mother-in-law for shedding copious tears of concernabout the well-being of her family and safety of its honour, while thewhole world cherishes the memory of Meera. After all, how long can we
ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
kegâlemlJee keâMceueefceob efJe<eces mecegheefmLeleced~DeveeÙe&peg°cemJeiÙe&cekeâere|lekeâjcepeg&ve  ~~2~~
ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-
kutastvÂ kaïmalamidaØ viîame samupasthitam |anÂryajuîòamasvargyamakÍrtikaramarjuna ||2||

Yatharth Geeta 38
remember the man who is concerned only about his family? Is it not
evident then that customs which bring neither glory nor sublimehappiness, and which have at no time been accepted by an Arya (aman of dharm), must be a kind of ignorance? Lord Krishn says to Arjun:
3. ?Don?t give in, O Parth, to unmanliness for it does not become
you. So, O Parantap, stand up and drive away this disgraceful
weakness of your heart.??
Lord Krishn exhorts Arjun not to yield to impotence. Is Arjun
impotent-lacking in virility? Are we virile men? An impotent man is one
who is devoid of manliness. All of us, according to our wisdom, do whatwe believe to be manly. A peasant who sweats day and night in hisfields, tries to prove his manliness by his labour. Some demonstratetheir manliness in commerce and yet others try to prove that they arereal men by abusing their powers. Ironically, however, even after thislifelong display of manliness, we depart but empty-handed at the end.Is it not obvious then that all this is not true manliness? True manlinessis Self-knowledge: awareness of the Soul and its divine origin. To citeyet another example from the Aatmpuran, Gargi tells Yagnvalkya that aman, though endowed with sexual prowess, is yet unmanly if he has noawareness of the embodied Soul.
This Self is the real man (Purush), radiant and unmanifest. The
endeavour to know this Self is true manliness (paurush). It is becauseof this that Lord Krishn asks Arjun not to surrender to impotence. It isunworthy of him. He is a scorcher, a formidable vanquisher, of foes. Sohe ought to reject his grovelling feebleness and stand up for battle. Heshould give up his social attachments, for they are mere frailties. Atthis Arjun raises his third question:
keäuewyÙeb cee mce iece: heeLe& vewleòJeÙÙegheheÅeles~
#egõb ùoÙeoewye&uÙeb lÙekeälJeesefòe? hejvlehe~~3~~
klaibyaØ mÂ sma gamaÉ pÂrtha naitattvayyupapadyate |
kîudraØ hçdayadaurbalyaØ tyaktvottiîòha parantapa ||3||

Chapter 2 39
4. ?Arjun said, ?How, O Madhusudan, slayer of enemies, shall I
shoot arrows in the battle against men like Bheeshm and
Dron who deserve only my honour????
Arjun addresses Lord Krishn as Madhusudan, destroyer of the
demon of ego, and wants to know from him how he can fight with his
grandsire Bheeshm and teacher Dron. Both are deserving of onlyreverence. Dual conduct, as we have seen, is Dronacharya: the conductthat arises from the feeling that God is separate from us and we areseparate from him. But the consciousness of this duality is also theinitial urge for spiritual accomplishment. This is Dronacharya?sexcellence as a teacher. And then there is Bheeshm, the very image ofdelusion. So long as we stray from the right path and are under thesway of delusion, children, family, and kinsmen all appear as our own.The feeling that they belong to me-are mine, is the medium throughwhich delusion works. The deluded man regards them as worthy ofworship and clings to them, for that one is father, the other onegrandfather, and still another the teacher who has taught him. But afterspiritual attainment there is neither teacher nor pupil, and the Self whohas gained awareness of the essence, of the Supreme Spirit, is left allalone.
When the Self is absorbed in God, neither is the teacher a preceptor
nor the disciple a receptacle. This is the state of the most exaltedexcellence. After assimilating the teacher?s excellence the discipleshares it, and the distinction between the teacher and the pupil isobliterated. Lord Krishn says, ?Arjun, you shall dwell in me.? Arjun willbecome identical with Lord Krishn, and the same is true of every sagewho has known attainment. In such a state the teacher?s existencemerges into, and his magnificence flows spontaneously like a crystalstream through, the disciple?s heart. But Arjun is yet far from that state
Depeg&ve GJeeÛe-
keâLeb Yeer<cecenb meÈ?es õesCeb Ûe ceOegmetove~F<egefYe: Øeefle ÙeeslmÙeeefce hetpeene&Jeefjmetove~~4~~
arjuna uvÂca-
kathaØ bhÍîmamahaØ saßkhye droàaØ ca madhusödana|iîubhiÉ prati yotsyÂmi pöjÂrhÂvarisödana ||4||

Yatharth Geeta 40
and at present he exploits even the teacher?s office as a shield to ward
off participation in the war.
5. ?Even to live in this world as a mendicant begging for alms
is better than killing teachers, for if l kill them all my joys and
riches and desires in this world will be drenched in (their)blood.?
Arjun prefers the life of a beggar who lives on alms to killing his
teachers. Rather than meaning ?to beg for livelihood? (for the sustenance
of the body), ?begging? here denotes soliciting great men-throughrendering even a half-hearted service to them-for the favour of propitiousfortune. Food is the only God, after partaking of which the Soul?s hungeris assuaged forever. That he should, even though in small measures,continue to taste the manna of God?s excellence by serving and solicitinga sage, without having to part with his family, is the craving behindArjun?s tearful appeal. Don?t most of us do the same? It is our aspirationthat we should gradually, at some point, achieve spiritual liberation withouthaving to destroy the ties of familial love and attachment. But there isno such way for the seeker who has achieved a higher level ofaccomplishment than this and is strong enough to face the war ragingon the battlefield of his heart. Soliciting and imploring like an almsmanrather than doing something on one?s own is like begging for food like amendicant.
In the ?Dhamnadayad Sutt? of Majjhim Nikaya, Mahatma Buddh
has also declared the food obtained by begging inferior because it islike flesh received as alms.
How will he profit, Arjun asks, by killing his teachers? What else
can the world reward him with for this crime but the unnatural enjoymentof bloodstained pleasures of sensual gratification and material prosperity?
ieg¤venlJee efn cenevegYeeJeeved
     ßesÙees Yeesòegbâ Yew#Ùeceheern ueeskesâ~
nlJeeLe&keâeceebmleg   ieg¤efvenwJe
     YegÀeerÙe Yeesieev®efOejØeefoiOeeved~~5~~
gurönahatvÂ hi mahÂnubhÂvÂn
        ïreyo bhoktuØ bhaikîamapÍha loke |
hatvÂrthakÂmÂØstu gurönihaiva
        bhuájÍya bhogÂnrudhirapradigdhÂn ||5||

Chapter 2 41
It appears from this that he perhaps believes that loving adoration of
God will augment his worldly happiness. So his only achievement evenafter the most strenuous struggle, he believes, can be nothing morethan enjoyment of riches which sustain the body and sensual pleasures.He goes on to make yet another reasoning:
6. ?I hardly know which is better, their (the Kaurav?s) conquering
us or our conquering them - even Dhritrashtr ?s sons-who
are our enemies, and yet after killing whom we may not wishto live.?
Even possession of the hoped-for delights is not assured. Arjun
is at his wit?s end as to what course of action can bring him glory, for
whatever he has said till now has been proved to be only ignorance. Hedoes not also know whether he will rout the Kaurav or they will rout him.Dhritrashtr?s sons, after slaying whom he should not desire to live, arearrayed against him. What shall he live for if his feelings of attachmentrepresented here by his kinsmen, all of them progeny of Dhritrashtr?signorance, are destroyed? At the same time, however, it occurs to Arjunthat what he has said now may be also false. So he turns to Lord Krishnagain:
7. ?With my mind swamped with feeble pity and confusion
regarding duty, I entreat you to instruct me as to what is
definitely conducive to my glory, for I am your disciple andhave taken refuge in you.?
With his heart enfeebled by pity and his mind clouded with
infatuation in regard to dharm, Arjun begs Lord Krishn to tell him the
ve ÛewleefÉ©e: keâlejVees iejerÙees
          ÙeÉe peÙesce Ùeefo Jee vees peÙesÙeg:~
ÙeevesJe nlJee ve efpepeerefJe<eece-
          mlesÓJeefmLelee: ØecegKes Oeele&je°^e:~~6~~keâehe&CÙeoes<eeshenlemJeYeeJe:
          he=ÛÚeefce  lJeeb  Oece&meccet{Ûeslee:~
ÙeÛÚ^sÙe: mÙeeefVeef§eleb yeÇtefn levces          efMe<ÙemlesÓnb MeeefOe ceeb lJeeb ØeheVeced~~7~~
na caitadvidmaÉ kataranno garÍyo
     yadvÂ jayema yadi vÂ no jayeyuÉ |
yÂneva hatvÂ na jijÍviîÂma-
     ste'vasthitÂÉ pramukhe dhÂrtaraîòrÂÉ ||6||
kÂrpaàyadoïopahatasvabhÂvaÉ
     pçcchÂmi tvÂØ dharmasammöÅhacetÂÉ |
yacchreyaÉ syÂnniïcitaØ bröhi tanme
     ïiîyaste'haØ ïÂdhi mÂØ tvÂØ prapannam ||7||

Yatharth Geeta 42
means that will definitely be the most conducive to what is supremely
propitious for him. But why should Lord Krishn do this? According toArjun, it is Lord Krishn?s duty to show him the right path because he(Arjun) is a disciple who has found shelter under him.
Furthermore, he needs not only instruction but also support when
he stumbles. He is like the man requesting a helper to place the load onhis back, help him in securing it there, and also to come along with him,for who will put back the load in place again if it slips down. Such isArjun?s abject submission to Lord Krishn.
At this point Arjun?s surrender is complete. Until now he had
thought himself an equal of Lord Krishn in merit and, in fact, evensuperior to him in certain skills. But now he really puts himself at themercy of his charioteer. An accomplished teacher dwells in his disciple?sheart and is always by his side until the goal is reached. If he is notthere by his side, the pupil may falter in his quest. Like the guardians ofa maiden who protect her till her marriage, an accomplished teacheracts as a charioteer who skilfully maneuvers his disciple?s Soul safelyacross the perilous valleys of nature. Arjun now makes one moresubmission:
8.??I do not see that obtaining an undisputed and profitable
dominion over the whole earth or, (for that matter) even
lordship over the gods, can cure the grief that is wearing outmy senses.??
Arjun cannot believe that even a secure and lucrative realm
extending across the whole earth or even an Indr-like lordship over the
gods of heaven can help him get rid of the sorrow that is withering hissenses. If his grief is unabated, what shall he do with all theseacquisitions? He begs to be excused from fighting in the war if these
ve efn ØeheMÙeeefce ceceehevegÅeeod
          ÙeÛÚeskeâcegÛÚes<eCeefceefvõÙeeCeeced~
DeJeehÙe    YetceeJemehelvece=æb          jepÙeb megjeCeeceefhe ÛeeefOehelÙeced~~8~~
na hi prapaïyÂmi mamÂpanudyÂd
yacchokamucchoîaàamindriyÂàÂm |
avÂpya bhömÂvasapatnamçddhaØrÂjyaØ surÂàÂmapi cÂdhipatyam ||8||

Chapter 2 43
are to be his only rewards in return. He is utterly disheartened and he
does not know what to say after this.
9. ?Sanjay said,? After having thus spoken to Hrishikesh, Arjun,
the conqueror of sleep and destroyer of foes, told Govind
(Krishn) that he would not fight, and then he fell silent.???
So far Arjun?s attitude has been determined by the Puran, which
contain ordinances for ceremonial acts and sacrificial rites as well as
the enjoyment of benefits arising from a due performance thereof. Inthese works, heaven is the ultimate goal: but Lord Krishn later enlightensArjun that this line of thought is mistaken.
10. ?Hrishikesh then, O Bharat, with a smile as it appeared, spoke
thus to him (Arjun) who sat mournfully between the two
armies.??
Lord Krishn, knower of secrets of the innermost heart (Hrishikesh),
speaks smilingly to the grieving Arjun:11. ?The Lord said, Although sorrowing over those who ought
not to be grieved for, you yet speak wise words; but the
discriminating mourn over neither the living nor those whoare dead.???
Lord Krishn tells Arjun that while he grieves for those who are
unworthy of such grief, he also speaks words of wisdom, but men of
discernment mourn neither for those whose souls have departed nor forthe ones who are living. They do not grieve for the living because theyshall also die. That means that Arjun only talks like a wise man; hedoes not know the reality, since-
me_peÙe GJeeÛe-
SJecegkeälJee  ù<eerkesâMeb  ieg[ekesâMe:  hejvlehe~ve ÙeeslmÙe Fefle ieesefJevocegkeälJee let<CeeR yeYetJe n~~9~~lecegJeeÛe ù<eerkesâMe: ØenmeefVeJe Yeejle~mesveÙees®YeÙeesce&OÙes efJe<eerovleefceob JeÛe:~~10~~ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-DeMeesÛÙeevevJeMeesÛemlJeb Øe%eeJeeoeb§e Yee<emes~ieleemetveieleemetb§e veevegMeesÛeefvle heefC[lee:~~11~~
saájaya uvÂca-
evamuktvÂ hçîÍkeïaØ guÅÂkeïaÉ parantapa |na yotsya iti govindamuktvÂ töîàÍØ babhöva ha ||9||tamuvÂca hriïÍkeïaÉ prahasanniva bhÂrata |senayorubhayormadhye viîÍdantamidaØ vacaÉ ||10||ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-aïocyÂnanvaïocastvaØ prajáÂvÂdÂØïca bhÂîase |gatÂsönagatasöØïca nÂnuïocanti paàÅitaÉ ||11||

Yatharth Geeta 44
12. ?It is not that either you or I, or all these kings, did not exist
in the past, nor is it that our being will come to an end in the
future.??
It is not, Lord Krishn explains, that he, the accomplished teacher,
or Arjun-the devoted pupil, or all these kings with the vanity that is
characteristic of rulers of men, did not exist at any time in the ages tocome. The accomplished teacher is forever, and so are affectionatedisciples as well as rulers who symbolize the perversions of passionand moral blindness. Here, besides throwing light on the permanenceof Yog in general, Yogeshwar Krishn has particularly stressed itsexistence in the future. Explaining why the dead should not be mournedover, he says:
13. ?Since the embodied Spirit passes through infancy, youth,
and old age in the body, and then transmigrates into another
body, men with steadfast minds do not grieve over his passingaway.??
As the embodied soul waxes from childhood to youth, then wanes
to old age, and assumes one new body after another, wise men are not
prey to infatuation. At some time a man is a boy and then he grows intoa young man. But does he die by this? Then he grows old. The Self isever the same; only the condition of the physical body in which heresides goes on changing. There is no crack in him when he changesover to a new body. This change from one physical body to another willcontinue until the Soul is united with the Supreme Spirit who alone isbeyond all change.
ve lJesJeenb peeleg veemeb ve lJeb vesces peveeefOehee:~
ve ÛewJe ve YeefJe<Ùeece: meJex JeÙecele: hejced ~~12~~
osefnveesÓefmcevÙeLee osns keâewceejb ÙeewJeveb peje~leLee osnevlejØeeefhleOeeajmle$e ve ceg¢eefle~~13~~
na tvevÂhaØ jÂtu nÂsaØ na tvaØ neme janÂdhipÂÉ |
na caiva na bhaviîyÂmaÉ sarve vayamataÉ param ||12||
dehino'sminyathÂ dehe kaumÂraØ yauvanaØ jarÂ |tathÂ dehÂntaraprÂptirdhÍrastatra na muhyati ||13||

Chapter 2 45
14. ?There are sensations of heat and cold, and of pain and
pleasure, O son of Kunti, as senses meet their objects. Bear
them patiently, O Bharat, because they have a beginning andan end, and are transient.??
The contact of senses and their objects, which generates pleasure
and pain, and feelings of cold and warmth, is occasional and momentary.
Arjun should, therefore, abandon them. But instead of that, he is shakenby the mere thought of pleasures that are derived from the union ofsenses and their objects. The family for the sake of whom we yearn forpleasures and the teacher whom we revere both represent the attachmentof senses. But the causes of this attachment are momentary, false andperishable. Neither shall our senses always meet with objects theyenjoy, nor shall they always be capable of enjoyment. So Arjun iscounselled to give up sensual pleasures and learn to withstand thedemands of his senses. But why is Arjun counselled thus? Is it aHimalayan war in which he has to endure cold? Or is it a desert war inwhich he has to suffer heat? As knowledgeable people say, the actual?Kurukshetr? has a moderate climate. During the mere eighteen daysthat is the total duration of the Mahabharat war, is it possible thatseasons will change: that winter and summer will come and go? Thetruth is that endurance of cold and heat, of happiness and sorrow, ofhonour and dishonour, depends upon the seeker?s spiritual endeavour.The Geeta is, as we have seen more than once, an externalization ofthe inner conflict that rages within the mind. This war is the war betweenthe gross physical body and the Self which is aware of his identity withGod. It is a conflict in which ultimately even the forces of divinity growinert after they have subdued unrighteous impulses and enabled theSelf to become one with God. When there remains no impiety, whatelse is there for pious impulses to fight? The Geeta is thus a picturizationof inner conflict that rages within the mind. What advantages, however,
cee$eemheMee&mleg keâewvlesÙe Meerlees<CemegKeog:Keoe:~
DeeieceeheeefÙeveesÓefvelÙeemleebefmleefle#emJe Yeejle~~14~~
matrÂsparïÂstu kaunteya ïÍtoîàasukhaduÉkhadÂÉ |
ÂgamÂpÂyino'nityÂstÂØstitikîasva bhÂrata ||14||

Yatharth Geeta 46
will the recommended sacrifice of senses and their pleasures bring?
What is gained by this? Lord Krishn speaks of this:
15. ?So, O the noblest of men (Arjun), one who is possessed of
equanimity in pain and pleasure, and firm, and untormented
by these (feelings produced by the meeting of senses withtheir objects), deserves (to taste) the nectar of immortality.??
The steadfast man, who regards sorrow and happiness with
equipoise and is not troubled by his senses and their association with
objects, is worthy of the state of immortality that realization of theSupreme Spirit brings. Here Lord Krishn refers to an attainment, namelyamrit, literally the drink of immortality. Arjun had thought that in returnfor the war he would be rewarded with either a heavenly abode or theauthority to rule over the earth. But now Lord Krishn tells him that hisprize will be amrit rather than the pleasures of heaven or earthly power.What is this amrit?
16. ??The unreal has no being and the real has no non-being; and
the truth about both has also been seen by men who know
the reality.??
The unreal has no existence; it has no being and so bringing it to
an end is out of the question. On the other hand, there is no absence of
the real in all time-past, present or future. Arjun then asks Lord Krishnwhether he is saying this as an incarnation of God. Lord Krishn?s replyto this is that the distinction between the real and the unreal has alsobeen revealed to sages who have realized the true nature of the humanSoul as identical with the Supreme Spirit pervading the universe. Thatis to say that Lord Krishn of the Geeta is a seer who has gained aninsight into reality. What, after all, are true and false, real and unreal?
Ùeb  efn  ve  JÙeLeÙevlÙesles  heg®<eb  heg®<e<e&Ye~
meceog:KemegKeb Oeerjb meesÓce=lelJeeÙe keâuheles~~15~~
veemelees efJeÅeles YeeJees veeYeeJees efJeÅeles mele:~GYeÙeesjefhe Â°esÓvlemlJeveÙeesmleòJeoe|MeefYe:~~16~~
yaØ hi na vyathayantyete puruîaØ puruîarîabha |
samaduÉkhasukhaØ dhÍraØ so'mçtatvÂya kalpate ||15||
nÂsato vidyate bhÂvo nÂbhÂvo vidyate sataÉ |ubhayorapi dçîto'ntastvanayostattvadarîibhiÉ ||16||

Chapter 2 47
17. ?Know that since the Spirit which pervades the universe is
imperishable and immutable, no one can effect his
destruction.?
That which spreads through and is present in every atom of the
universe is indestructible. No one is capable of destroying the
imperishable principle. But what is the name of this deathless amrit?Who is he?
18.  ?Fight, O Bharat (Arjun), because while the bodies which
clothe the Soul are said to come to an end, the embodied
Spirit itself is forever, indestructible, and boundless.??
Arjun is exhorted to get up and fight because all these physical
bodies that embody the indwelling, boundless, and eternal Spirit are
said to be ephemeral. This Spirit, the Self, is imperishable, and it cannotbe destroyed at any time. The Self is real, whereas the physical body issubject to death, and so unreal and nonexistent at all times.
Lord Krishn?s injunction to Arjun is, ?Fight because the body is
mortal.? But it is not evident from the exhortation whether Arjun is requiredto kill only the Kaurav. Aren?t the men on the side of Pandav, too,?bodies?? Are the Pandav immortal? If physical bodies are mortal, whois Lord Krishn there to defend? Is Arjun not a body, too? Is Lord Krishnthere to defend that body which is unreal, without being, and unceasing?If it is so, may it not be assumed that he too is ignorant and lacking indiscrimination, the power that distinguishes between the visible worldand the invisible Spirit. Doesn?t he himself say later that the man whothinks of and toils only for the physical body (3.13) is ignorant andwanting in discernment? Such a wretched man lives in vain. There isalso another problem. Who really is this Arjun?
DeefJeveeefMe leg leefÉefæ Ùesve meJe&efceob leleced~
efJeveeMeceJÙeÙemÙeemÙe ve keâef§elkeâleg&cen&efle~~17~~
DevleJevle Fces osne efvelÙemÙeesòeâe: MejerefjCe:~
DeveeefMeveesÓØecesÙemÙe lemceeÅegOÙemJe Yeejle~~18~~
avinÂïi tu tadviddhi yena sarvamidaØ tatam |
vinÂïamavyayasyÂsya na kaïcitkartumarhati ||17||
antavanta ime dehÂ nityasyoktÂÉ ïarÍriàaÉ |
anÂïino'prameyasya tasmÂdyudhyasva bhÂrata ||18||

Yatharth Geeta 48
As it was said in Chapter I, Arjun is an embodiment of affectionate
devotion. Like a faithful charioteer, the Revered God is always with his
devotee. Like a friend, he guides him and shows him the right way. Weare not a physical body. The body is a mere garment, a dwelling for theSoul to live in. The one who lives in it is the affectionate Self. Thephysical body was sometime back called ?unceasing.? Elemental warsand slaughter do not destroy the body. When one body is forsaken, theSoul just assumes another body. It is with reference to this that LordKrishn has said that there is change from one body to another just as aman grows from childhood to youth, and then to old age. If you hack abody to pieces, the Soul just puts on another body like a new apparel.
The real base of the body is constituted by sanskar, the merits-
the influences and impressions-earned during a previous existence.And sanskar rests upon the mind. Perfect subjugation of the mind, sothat it can be changeless, firm, and constant, and the dissolution of thelast sanskar, are all different aspects of the same process. Thedisintegration of the last crust of this sanskar marks the end of physicalexistence. To bring about this dissolution we have to undertake aradhana,worship and adoration, of the desired God. Lord Krishn has named itaction (karm) or the Way of Selfless Action (Nishkam Karm Yog). Inthe Geeta, he has from time to time urged Arjun to wage war, but in theentire poem there is not one verse that supports the idea that this war isa physical war or in any way related to the idea of actual bloodshed.Evidently this war is the war between the opposed impulses ofrighteousness and unrighteousness, the forces of piety and those ofimpiety, that is fought within man?s Soul-the seat of all thought andfeeling.
19. ?They are both ignorant, he who believes that the Self slays
and he who thinks that he is slain, for he neither slays nor he
is slain.??
Ùe Sveb Jesefòe nvleejb Ùe§ewveb cevÙeles nleced~
GYeew leew ve efJepeeveerlees veeÙeb nefvle ve nvÙeles~~19~~
ya enaØ vetti hantÂraØ yaïcainaØ manyate hatam |
ubhau tau na vijÂnÍto nÂyaØ hanti na hanyate ||19||

Chapter 2 49
He who regards the Self as the slayer and he who regards him as
the slain are both unaware of his real nature, for he neither kills nor can
he be killed. The same point is stressed again:
20. ?Neither (ever) born nor dying, neither at any time coming
into being nor ceasing to  be, the Self is birthless, perpetual,
unchanging, and timeless, and he is not destroyed when thebody is destroyed.??
The Self, the God within soul, is neither at any time born nor does
he at any time die, for what he undergoes in the name of death is a
mere change of apparel. He cannot also be anything other than Self,because he is birthless, permanent, eternal, and primeval. Disintegration,death, of the body does not annihilate the self. The Self alone is real,timeless, unchanging, and eternal. Who are you? A follower of the eternalDharm? What is forever? The Self. So you are a follower, a disciple, ofthe Self. The Self and Brahm (God) are synonymous, And who areyou? A worshiper of the eternal Dharm. What is immutable? The Self,of course. That is to say that you and I all are adorers of the Self? Butif we are not familiar with the spiritual path to the eternal truth, the wayof following the dictates of the Self until he is one with the SupremeSpirit, we have nothing that is worthy of being described as changelessand everlasting. We are on trial for the final absolution and in closeproximity to God if we pine for him, but we cannot be deemed as havingbeen admitted as long as we are credulous enough to accept blindlyone wrong convention or the other masquerading as Sanatan Dharm.
Be it in India or any other country, the Soul in all is identical. So,
if anywhere on the earth there is a man who is aware of the true natureof Self and his ultimate goal, and who is eager to take to the way whichwill eventually lead his Self to the Supreme Spirit, be he a professed
ve peeÙeles  efceüÙeles Jee keâoeefÛe-
         VeeÙeb YetlJee YeefJelee Jee ve YetÙe:~Depees efvelÙe: MeeÕeleesÓÙeb hegjeCees
         ve nvÙeles nvÙeceeves Mejerjs~~20~~
na jÂyate mriyate vÂ kadÂci-
         nnÂyaØ bhötvÂ bhavitÂ vÂ na bhöyaÉ |
ajo nityaÉ ïÂïvato'yaØ purÂào
         na hanyate hanyamÂne ïarÍre ||20||

Yatharth Geeta 50
Christian, Muslim, Jew, or anything else, he undoubtedly also belongs
to the fold of Sanatan Dharm-the changeless and eternal.
21. ?How can he, O Parth, who is conscious of the Soul within
as imperishable, permanent, birthless, and immutable, kill
or move another to kill??
Arjun is addressed as Parth, for he has made a chariot of the
earth-made body and is preparing to take a perfect aim at the Supreme
Spirit. The man who knows that the embodied Soul is indestructible,permanent, beyond birth, and unmanifest-how can he make others slayor be a slayer himself? Destruction of what is indestructible is impossible.And, being beyond birth, the Self is also never born. So why grieve forthe body? This idea is further elaborated in the following verse:
22. ?Like a man who puts on new garments after discarding his
worn out clothes, the embodied Self, also, casts off tattered
bodies and transmigrates into other bodies that are new.??
The Soul rejects bodies that have been ravaged by old age or
some other disease and dresses himself in new apparel just as a man
throws away old, torn clothes and puts on new clothes. But if newclothing is needed only when the fabric of old clothes is weakened, whydo young children die?
These ?garments? have yet to grow and evolve. It was said a little
earlier that the body rests on sanskar, the impressions from actionattained in the course of a previous existence. When the store of sanskaris depleted, the Self discards the body. If the sanskar is of two days?duration only, the body will be on the brink of death on the second dayitself. Beyond sanskar there is not even a single breath of life; sanskar
JesoeefJeveeefMeveb efvelÙeb Ùe SvecepeceJÙeÙeced~
keâLeb me heg®<e: heeLe& kebâ IeeleÙeefle nefvle keâced~~21~~
Jeemeebefme peerCee&efve ÙeLee efJeneÙe
         veJeeefve ie=åCeeefle vejesÓhejeefCe~leLee MejerjeefCe  efJeneÙe peerCee&-
         vÙevÙeeefve mebÙeeefle veJeeefve osner~~22~~
vedÂvinÂïinaØ nityaØ ya enamajamavyayam |
kathaØ sa puruîaÉ pÂrtha kaØ ghÂtayati hanti kam||21||
vÂsÂØsi jÍràÂni yathÂ vihÂya
navÂni gçhàÂti naro'parÂài |tathÂ ïarÍrÂài vihÂya jÍràa-
nyanyÂni saØyÂti navÂni dehÍ ||22||

Chapter 2 51
is the body and the Self assumes a new body according to his sanskar.
According to the Chandogya Upanishad, ?A man is primarily his will. Asis his will in this life, so does he become when he departs from it.? It isthe firmness of his will in one life that determines what a man will be inthe next. Man is thus born in bodies that are shaped by his own will. Sodeath is a mere physical change: the Self does not die. Lord Krishnagain emphasizes the same imperishability of the Soul.
23. ??This Self is neither pierced by weapons, nor burnt by fire,
nor made damp by water, nor dried up by wind.?? Weapons cannot cleave the Self. Fire cannot singe him. He
cannot also be drenched by water, nor withered by wind.24. ??The Self, which cannot be pierced or burnt or made wet or
faded, is uninterrupted, all-pervasive, constant, immovable,
and eternal.??
The Self cannot be cut or pierced through; he cannot be burnt;
and he cannot be soaked. Even the whole firmament cannot contain
him within its expanse. The Self is beyond doubt, ever-fresh,omnipresent, immovable, constant, and everlasting.
Arjun has pronounced family traditions to be eternal. So, according
to him, the war will destroy Sanatan Dharm itself. But Lord Krishn findsit an example of ignorance and points out that the Self alone is eternal.If we do not know the means by which we can realize our Self and hisgoal, we have no inkling of Sanatan Dharm. India has paid a heavyprice for this ignorance.
The total number of Muslim invaders who came to this country in
the Middle Ages was approximately twelve thousand. Today they havemultiplied to more than 280 million. Twelve thousand could reasonably
vewveb efÚvoefvle Me?eeefCe vewveb onefle heeJekeâ:~
ve Ûewveb keäuesoÙevlÙeehees ve Mees<eÙeefle cee®le:~~23~~
DeÛÚsÅeesÓÙeceoe¢eesÓÙecekeäuesÅeesÓMees<Ùe SJe Ûe~
efvelÙe: meJe&iele: mLeeCegjÛeueesÓÙeb meveeleve:~~24~~
nainaØ chindanti ïastrÂài nainaØ dahati pÂvakaÉ |
na cainaØ kledayantyÂpo na ïoîayati mÂrutaÉ ||23||
acchedyo'yam adÂhyo'yamakledyo'ïoîya eva ca |
nityaÉ sarvagataÉ sthÂàuracalo'yaØ sanÂtanaÉ ||24||

Yatharth Geeta 52
have grown to a few hundred thousand to 10 million at the most. They
could not have grown to more than this. But their number now is morethan a 280 million. Now, who are the majority of them but Hindus, ourown coreligionists and brothers, who were lost to the fold because ofour absurd taboos of food and touch? In fact, their conversion is a proofthat we have by and large lost touch with Sanatan Dharm. We are sobefogged by silly customs that we have lost the capacity to realize thatfood and touch cannot destroy Sanatan Dharm. The truth is that noobject of the material world can touch this universal spiritual principle.What has made us lose millions of our brothers is not dharm but onlysome stupid conventions. And the same misconceptions must be heldresponsible for our worsening communal situation, partition of India,and even for the serious threats to our national unity and integrity thatwe are facing today. There are innumerable examples of how we havesuffered because of our mindless customs that have nothing to do withdharm.
There used to live fifty-to-sixty cultured Kshatriy families in a
village in Hamirpur district. But today they are all Muslims. Were theyproselytized, we may ask, under threat of swords and guns? Not at all.What really happened was this ? One night a couple of mullahs hidthemselves near the only well of the village, knowing that the first batherto come to the well in the morning would be the karmkandi
2 Brahmin of
the village. When he came, the mullahs caught hold of him and gaggedhim. Then before his eyes they drew some water out of the well, dranksome of it, and poured the rest back into the well; they also dropped apiece of partly-eaten bread into it. The Brahmin looked on dumbfoundedat all this, but he was helpless. Finally, the mullahs left along with theBrahmin, whom they locked up in their house.
The next day when the mullahs requested him with folded hands
to eat something, the Brahmin flared up and said, ?you are a Yavan
3
2. An expert of the section of the Ved which is related to ceremonial acts and
sacrificial rites.
3. Originally meaning an lonian (Greek).

Chapter 2 53
and I am a Brahmin. How on earth can I eat your food?? The mullahs
replied, ?Revered sir, we sorely need wise men like you.?? Thereafter theBrahmin was set free.
He went back to his village and saw his people using the well as
before. So as a penance he went on fast. When people asked him forthe reason, he told them how some Muslims had climbed upon the lowwall around the well, and how they had also poured defiled water andcast a piece of partly-eaten bread into it. Stunned, the people of thevillage asked, ?What shall we do now?? The Brahmin replied, ?Nothing,because we have lost our dharm.?
People were usually not educated in those days. No one knows
how long since women and the, so called ?untouchables? had beendeprived of the right to learn. The Vaishy were convinced that makingmoney was their only dharm. The Kshatriy were absorbed in the laudatorysongs of minstrels. No sooner did their master?s sword flash than therewas lightning and the throne of Delhi began to shake. If honour camefrom muscle power, the Kshatriy thought, why should they study andlearn? What had they, weilders of arms, to do with dharm. Dharm hadthus turned into a monopoly of the Brahmin. Not only were they framersof religious laws as well as their interpreters, they had also appointedthemselves the final arbiters of right and wrong-of the true and the false.Such was the country?s moral and spiritual degradation in the medievaltimes. As against this, in ancient India, not only the Brahmin butmembers of all classes and even women had been entitled to study ofthe Ved. Sages of different schools had then composed the Vedic versesand participated in spiritual discourses and debates. Ancient Indianrulers are known to have severely punished those who propagatedpretence and affectation in the name of dharm. They had also paid duerespect to the scriptures of religions other than their own.
But in medieval India, ignorant of the spirit of Sanatan Dharm, the
Kshatriy of the village of our sad story slunk one after the other into acorner like frightened sheep, shuddering with the unbearable agony ofthe thought that they had lost their dharm. Some of them even committed

Yatharth Geeta 54
suicide. But, of course, all of them could not be expected to kill
themselves. Men of staunch faith, they yet looked for an alternativebecause of their mistaken belief. Even today the Muslims of the Hamirpurvillage solemnize their weddings like Hindus. Only at the end of theceremony a mullah is brought in to perform the nikah ceremony. All ofthem were once faithful Hindus and all of them are now faithful Muslims.
The catastrophe, as we have seen, was brought about by nothing
more than the prevailing Hindu belief that their water would be defiled ifit was touched by a Muslim. The misguided villagers were convincedthat they had lost their dharm by using defiled water. So that is whatdharm had been reduced to in medieval India. It had turned into somethinglike the plant whose leaves shrink and droop at being touched. We callthis plant Lajwanti (the shy one). Its leaves contract if you just touchthem, but they expand and firm up when you remove your hand. Whata great pity that a mere plant revives as soon as the hand that touchedit moves away, but the dharm of the Hamirpur villagers withered soirreversibly that it could never revive again. Their dharm was dead, andalso gone for them forever were their Ram, their Lord Krishn, and theirGod. The powers that they had taken as forever now ceased to exist forthem. That is how the ignorant villagers looked at the question. Thetruth is, however, that the power that was dead was only certain stupidcustoms which people had taken for dharm out of their spiritual ignorance.Dharm protects us and is, therefore, stronger than us. But whereaseven the mortal body needs some kind of a weapon to be killed, thepeculiar ??dharm?? of the gullible Hindu was destroyed by a mere touch.What kind of dharm was it, we wonder, for it is man-made customswhich die, nor that which is eternal and immutable?
That which is eternal is so strong and impregnable that arms
cannot pierce it, fire cannot burn it, and water cannot wet it. Nothingthat belongs to the material world can touch it, let alone food and drink.
Some such misguided traditions had prevailed at the time of Arjun,
too, and he was obviously one of their victims. So he tearfully whinesto Lord Krishn about the eternal nature of family rites and customs. The

Chapter 2 55
war, he says, will destroy Sanatan Dharm, and when this is lost, all the
members of the family are bound to end up in hell. It is evident thatwhat Arjun is talking about is some customary beliefs of his time. Thatis why the spiritually adept Lord Krishn refutes him and points out thatthe Self alone is perpetual. If we do not know the way to this embodiedGod, we are yet uninitiated into the spirit of Sanatan Dharm. Knowingthat this immutable, eternal Self pervades all, what should we look for?This is what Lord Krishn speaks of now:
25. ?Knowing that the Self is unmanifest, a non-object to the
senses, incomprehensible because he is a non-object to the
mind, and changeless, (O Arjun), it does not befit you to grieve(over him).??
The Soul is unmanifest and not an object of the senses. He cannot
be grasped by the senses. He is present even when there is the
association of senses with their objects, but he cannot be comprehended.He is beyond thought. He is eternal and he is present even when themind and its volitions persist, but he is beyond perception, enjoyment,and access. So the mind has to be restrained. Lord Krishn has toldArjun that the unreal has no existence and neither is the real evernonexistent. The Self is that reality. It is the Self that is changeless,constant, eternal, and unmanifest. They who know the essence havefound the Self adorned with these traits. Not linguists nor the affluent,but only seers have known the unique character of the Self. In Chapter18, Lord Krishn will affirm that the Supreme Spirit alone is real. Byrestraining the mind, the worshiper sees him and becomes one withhim. At the moment of attainment he realizes God and, the very nextmoment after this, he finds his own soul adorned with Godlike traits. Hesees then that this Self is true, eternal, and perfect. This Self is beyondthe reach of thought. Free from any deviation, it is called immutable.Lord Krishn then uses simple logic to demonstrate the contradictionsbetween Arjun?s thoughts.
DeJÙeòeâesÓÙeceefÛevlÙeesÓÙeceefJekeâeÙeexÓÙecegÛÙeles~
lemceeosJeb  efJeefolJewveb  veevegMeesefÛelegcen&efme~~25~~
avyakto'yamacintyo'yamavikÂryo'yamucyate |
tasmÂdevaØ viditvainaØ nÂnuïocitumarhasi ||25||

Yatharth Geeta 56
26. ?You ought not to grieve, O the mighty-armed, even if you
think of him (the Self) as ever-born and ever-dying.??
Arjun ought not to mourn even if he regards the Self as constantly
born and constantly dying.27. ?Since this also proves the certain death of what is born and
the certain birth of what dies, you ought not to grieve over
the inevitable.??
Even the assumption that the Self is ever-born and ever-dying
only goes to establish that the born must die and the dead must be
born. So Arjun ought not to grieve over what must be, for sorrowingover something which is inevitable is inviting yet another sorrow.
28. ?Why grieve over the matter, O Bharat (Arjun), when all beings,
disembodied before birth and disembodied after death, appear
to possess a body only between the two events??
All beings are body-less before birth and also body-less after death.
They can be seen neither before birth nor after death. It is only between
birth and death that they assume the form of a body. So why grieveuselessly over this change? But who can see this Self? Lord Krishnanswers the question thus:
29. ?Only a seer views the Soul as a marvel, another one describes
him as a marvel, and yet another one hears him as marvel.
While there are some who hear him and yet know him not.??
DeLe Ûewveb efvelÙepeeleb efvelÙeb Jee cevÙemes ce=leced~
leLeeefhe lJeb ceneyeenes vewJeb MeesefÛelegcen&efme~~26~~peelemÙe efn OeÇgJees ce=lÙegOeÇg&Jeb pevce ce=lemÙe Ûe~
lemceeoheefjneÙexÓLex ve lJeb MeesefÛelegcen&efme~~27~~
DeJÙeòeâeoerefve Yetleeefve JÙeòeâceOÙeeefve Yeejle~DeJÙeòeâefveOeveevÙesJe le$e keâe heefjosJevee~~28~~
Dee§eÙe&JelheMÙeefle keâef§eosve-
       cee§eÙe&JeÉoefle leLewJe ÛeevÙe:~Dee§eÙe&JeÛÛewvecevÙe: ëe=Ceesefle
       ßeglJeehÙesveb Jeso ve ÛewJe keâef§eled~~29~~atha cainaØ nityajÂtaØ nityaØ vÂ manyase mçtam |
tathÂpi tvaØ mahÂbÂho nainaØ ïocitumarhasi ||26||jÂtasya hi dhruvo mçtyurdhruvaØ janma mçtasya ca |
tasmÂdaparihÂrye'rthe na tvaØ ïocitumarhasi ||27||
avyaktÂdÍni bhötÂni vyaktamadhyÂni bhÂrata |avyaktanidhanÂnyeva tatra kÂ paridevanÂ ||28||
Âïcaryavatpaïyati kaïcidena-
mÂïcaryavadvadati tathaiva canyaÉ |ÂïcaryavaccainamanyaÉ ïçàoti
ïrutvÂpyenaØ veda na caiva kaïcit ||29||

Chapter 2 57
Lord Krishn has said before that only enlightened, realized sages
have viewed the Self. Now he elaborates the rareness of this vision.
Only a rare sage sees the Self-views him directly rather than just hearof him. Similarly, another rare sage speaks of his substance. Only hewho has seen the Self can describe him. Yet another rare seeker hearshim as a wonder, for even hearing the voice of the Self is not possiblefor all because it is meant only for men of high spiritual attainment.There are people who hear the Self and yet know him not, because theyare incapable of treading the spiritual path. A man may listen to,countless words of wisdom, split hairs, and be eager to acquire thehighest wisdom. But his attachments are possessed of irresistible mightand after only a short while he finds himself reversed to worldly business.
So at last Lord Krishn gives his verdict:
30. ?Since the Self dwelling in all bodies is unslayable, O Bharat,
it does not befit you to grieve for living beings.??
Arjun ought not to mourn for living beings because the Self, in
whatever body he is, can be neither slain nor pierced through. Duly
expounded and treated with authority, the point at issue that ?the Self iseternal? is concluded here.
But there arises another question at this point. How to realize and
fulfil the Self? In the whole of the Geeta only two ways are suggestedfor this, first ?the Way of Selfless Action? (Nishkam Karm Yog) and,secondly, ?the Way of Discernment? (Gyan Yog). The required actionfor both the ways is the same. Stressing the necessity of this action,Yogeshwar Krishn says:
31. ?In view of your own dharm, too, it is unworthy of you to
fear, for there is nothing more propitious for a Kshatriy than
a righteous war.??
osner efvelÙeceJeOÙeesÓÙeb osns meJe&mÙe Yeejle~
lemceelmeJee&efCe Yetleeefve ve lJeb MeesefÛelegcen&efme~~30~~
mJeOece&ceefhe  ÛeeJes#Ùe  ve  efJekeâefchelegcen&efme~OecÙee&efæ ÙegæeÛÚ^sÙeesÓvÙel#eef$eÙemÙe ve efJeÅeles~~31~~
dehÍ nityamavadhyo'yaØ dehe sarvasya bhÂrata |
tasmÂtsarvÂài bhötÂni na tvaØ ïocitumarhasi ||30||
svadharmamapi cÂvekîya na vikampitumarhasi |dharmyÂddhi yuddhÂcchreyo'nyatkîatriyasya na vidyate||31

Yatharth Geeta 58
It does not befit Arjun to be hesitant even if he just keeps his
dharm in view, because there is no greater good for a Kshatriy than a
war of piety. It has been repeatedly said that ?the Self is immutable,?that ?the Self is eternal,? and that ?the Self is the only real dharm.? Nowwhat is this dharm of the Self (swadharm)? The Self is the only dharm,although the capacity to engage in this dharm varies from individual toindividual. This ability arising from one?s disposition has been namedswadharm or the inherent dharm.
Ancient sages divided the travellers on the eternal path of the
Self into four classes, Shudr, Vaishy, Kshatriy, and Brahmin, accordingto their innate abilities. In the primary stage of accomplishment everyseeker is a Shudr, meaning one who is deficient in knowledge. He spendshours on worship and adoration of God, and yet fails to render even tenminutes of his time truly beneficial to his spiritual quest. He is unable tocut through the illusory facade of the material world. Sitting devoutly atthe feet of a realized Sage, an accomplished teacher, at this stagehelps in the cultivation of virtues in his nature. With this he is promotedto the level of a seeker of the Vaishy class. Gradually realizing thataccomplishments of the Self are the only true accomplishments, hebecomes adept in seizing and protecting his senses. Passion and wrathare fatal to the senses, whereas discrimination and renunciation protectthem, but they are by themselves incapable of annihilating seeds of thematerial world. Gradually, then, as the worshiper progresses further,his heart and mind grow strong enough to carve their way through thethree properties of nature. This is the inborn quality of a Kshatriy. Atthis point the worshiper acquires the ability to destroy the world of natureand its perversions. So this is the point of commencement of the war.By further refinement after this, the worshiper is slowly elevated to thecategory of a Brahmin. Some of the virtues that now grow in the seekerare control of the mind and senses, incessant contemplation, simplicity,perception, and knowledge. By slowly perfecting these qualities, then,he ultimately attains to God, and at this stage he ceases to be even aBrahmin.

Chapter 2 59
At a sacrifice performed by Janak, King of Videh, answering
questions by Chakrayan Ushast, Kahol, Aruni, Uddalak, and Gargi,
Maharshi Yagnvalkya said that a Brahmin is one who has achieveddirect realization of the Self. It is the Self, dwelling in this world and thehigher world, and in all beings, that governs all from within. The Self isthe inner ruler. The sun, the moon, the earth, water, ether, fire, stars,space, the sky, and every moment of time-are under the authority ofthis Self. This embodied Self, knowing and controlling the mind and theheart from within, is immortal. He is the imperishable reality (Akshar)and anything that is not Self is destroyed. In this world, he who offersoblations, performs sacrifices, practices austerities, even though formany thousands of years but without an awareness of this reality, gainslittle: all his offerings and exercises are perishable. He who departsfrom this life without knowing the imperishable is like a wretched miser.But he who dies with knowledge of reality is a Brahmin
4.
Arjun is Kshatriy worshiper. According to Lord Krishn there is no
more beneficial way for such a seeker than war. The question is: whatis meant by the term Kshatriy? Usually, in social usage, it is taken asone of the terms such as Brahmin, Vaishy, and Shudr, which aredenominations of ?castes? determined by birth. These four constitutewhat are known as the fourfold varn. But that such was not the originalintent behind the provision is evident from what the Geeta has to sayabout the inherent disposition of the Kshatriy. Here Lord Krishn justdemonstrates the duty of a Kshatriy. The problem, namely of what varnis and how a man of inferior varn can by his conduct gradually elevatehimself to a higher class, is repeatedly taken up and resolved at thevery end of the sacred composition.
Lord Krishn says that he has created the four varn. Did he in
doing so divide men into four classes? He himself says that it was notso: he has only divided action into four categories according to theinnate property. So we have to see what that action is which has thusbeen divided. Properties are variable. The correct mode of worship can
4. The Upanishad Brihadaranyak (8/13)

Yatharth Geeta 60
elevate one from the lowest property of ignorance to that of passion
and moral blindness, and hence to virtue, or the quality of goodness.So through gradual cultivation of the inherent property, any individualcan evolve himself into a Brahmin. He is, then, possessed of all thequalities that are essential to the attainment of and union with the SupremeSpirit. The question raised here related to Varn is finally resolved in the18th chapter.
Lord Krishn lays down that even if the inherent ability, by which a
man participates in this dharm, is of the unmeritorious and ignorantShudr level, it is beneficial in the highest sense, because it is the startingpoint from where he can set out on the path of Self-cultivation. However,the worshiper is destroyed if he imitates the manner of higher classes.Arjun is a worshiper of the Kshatriy class. That is why Lord Krishnenjoins him to remember his ability to wage war, because through it hewill know that irresolution and grief are unworthy of him. There is nobetter task than this for a Kshatriy. Clarifying the point further, theYogeshwar says:
32. ?Blessed indeed, O Parth, are the Kshatriy who, without
seeking, come upon such a war which is like an open door
to heaven.?
The perfect marksman Arjun has made a chariot of the temporal
body itself. Only the most fortunate among Kshatriy get an opportunity
to fight in a war of righteousness that provides fighters with an opengateway to heaven. The worshiper of the Kshatriy class is strong enoughto subdue all the three properties of matter. The door to heaven is opento him because he has stored an abundance of divine riches in hisheart. He is qualified for the enjoyment of celestial existence. This isthe open way to heaven. Only the fortunate among the Kshatriy, theones who have the capacity to wage war, are able to know the significanceof the incessant struggle that goes on between matter and spirit.
ÙeÂÛÚÙee  ÛeesheheVeb  mJeie&ÉejceheeJe=leced~
megefKeve: #eef$eÙee: heeLe& ueYevles ÙegæceerÂMeced~~32~~
yadçcchayÂ copapannaØ svargadvÂramapÂvçtam |
sukhinaÉ kîatriyÂÉ pÂrtha labhante yuddhamÍdçïam ||32||

Chapter 2 61
There are wars in the world. People assemble at a place and
fight. But even victors in these wars fail to secure a lasting victory.
These wars are, in fact, only acts of getting satisfaction by deliberatelyinflicting injury for injuries inflicted-mere acts of vengeance. The morea man suppresses others, the more he is eventually suppressed himself.What kind of victory is this in which there is only sense-withering grief?And at the end the body is also destroyed. The really beneficial war isthe conflict between matter and spirit, for a single conquest in this warresults in domination of matter by the Self. This is a conquest afterwhich there is no possibility of defeat.
33. ?And if you do not engage in this righteous war, you will
lose the dharm of your Self and glory, and be guilty of sin.??If Arjun does not fight in this war of matter and spirit, which will
afford him access to the Supreme Spirit-to the immutable, eternal dharm,
he will be deprived of his inherent capacity for action and struggle, andwallow in the mire of repeated birth and death, and of disgrace. LordKrishn then clarifies the nature of this disgrace:
34. ?And all will forever speak of your disgrace and such disgrace
is worse than death itself for a man of honour.??People will long speak ill of Arjun?s unmanliness. Even today
sages like Vishwamitr, Parasher, Nimi, and Shringi are remembered
chiefly for their transgressions of the path of righteousness. Soworshipers reflect on their dharm. They think about what others will sayof them. Such thought is helpful in the process of spiritual seeking. Itprovides the urge for persevering with the quest for the ultimate reality.It also provides support over a certain length of the spiritual way. Infamyis even worse than death for honourable men.
DeLe ÛesòJeefceceb OecÙeË me*d«eeceb ve keâefj<Ùeefme~
lele: mJeOeceË keâere\le Ûe efnlJee heeheceJeehmÙeefme~~33~~Dekeâere\le Ûeeefhe Yetleeefve keâLeefÙe<Ùeefvle lesÓJÙeÙeeced~
mecYeeefJelemÙe    Ûeekeâere|lece&jCeeoefleefjÛÙeles~~34~~
atha cettvamimaØ dharmyaØ saßgrÂmaØ na kariîyasi|
tataÉ svadharmaØ kÍrtiØ ca hitvÂ pÂpamavÂpsyasi ||33||akÍrtiØ cÂpi bhötÂni kathayiîyanti te'vyayÂm |
sambhÂvitasya cÂkÍrtirmaraàÂdatiricyate ||34||

Yatharth Geeta 62
35. ?Even the great warriors who have a high regard for you will
then scorn you for having turned your back upon the war out
of fear.??
The mighty warriors, in whose esteem Arjun will then fall from
honour to dishonour, will believe that he had retreated from the war due
to cowardice. Who are these other great warriors? They, too, are seekerswho make their way strenuously along the path of spiritual realization.The other formidable warriors who oppose them are, on the contrary,desire for sensual pleasure, anger, greed, and attachment, that dragthe worshiper with equal tenacity towards ignorance. Arjun will bedisgraced in the eyes of the very people who now hold him in highesteem as a worthy seeker. Apart from this,
36. ?There can be nothing more painful for you than the
disparaging and improper words your adversaries will speak
against your valour.??
His enemies will malign Arjun and utter words about him that
should not be spoken. A single blemish is sufficient to bring upon one a
shower of slander and abuse from all directions. Even words, improperfor speech, are spoken. Can there be a greater grief than being anobject of such calumny? So Lord Krishn tells Arjun:
37. ?Rise up with determination for the war because if you die in
it you will attain to heaven and, if you win, you will attain to
the most exalted glory.??
If Arjun loses his life in the war, he will go to heaven and which is
to be with Swar - the indestructible God. The impulses that guide one
YeÙeeõCeeoghejleb  cebmÙevles  lJeeb  cenejLee:~
Ùes<eeb Ûe lJeb yengcelees YetlJee ÙeemÙeefme ueeIeJeced~~35~~
DeJeeÛÙeJeeoeb§e yentvJeefo<Ùeefvle leJeeefnlee:~efvevovlemleJe meeceLÙeË lelees og:Kelejb veg efkeâced~~36~~
nlees Jee ØeehmÙeefme mJeieË efpelJee Jee Yees#Ùemes cenerced~
lemceeogefòe?  keâewvlesÙe  ÙegæeÙe  ke=âleefve§eÙe:~~37~~
bhayÂdraàÂduparataØ maØsyante tvÂØ mahÂrathÂÉ |
yeîÂØ ca tvaØ bahumato bhötvÂ yÂsyasi lÂghavam||35
avÂcyavÂdÂØïca bahönvadiîyanti tavÂhitÂÉ |nindantastava sÂmarthyaØ tato duÉkhataraØ nu kim||36
hato vÂ prÂpsyasi svargaØ jitvÂ vÂ bhokîyase mahÍm |
tasmÂduttiîòha kaunteya yuddhÂya kçtaniïcayaÉ ||37||

Chapter 2 63
towards the world of matter that is external to the Self will be retarded.
And his heart will then overflow with the divine qualities that enable oneto realize the Supreme Spirit. In case he wins, however, he will attain tothe state of redemption, the noblest accomplishment. So Lord Krishnexhorts Arjun to get up determinedly and prepare for war.
Usually by the verse under examination it is understood that if
Arjun dies in the war, he will be privileged to live in heaven, but that if heis victorious he will be rewarded with enjoyment of worldly pleasures.But we cannot but remember that Arjun has told Lord Krishn that, inneither a realm made up of all the three worlds, nor even in an Indr-likelordship over gods, can he see the means that can remedy the griefthat is wearing out his senses. If he is to achieve only all this, he hassaid, he will not fight at any cost. Nevertheless, Lord Krishn exhortshim to fight. What greater reward than domination over the earth in caseof victory and celestial pleasures in case of defeat does Lord Krishnpromise Arjun in order to make him fight? Arjun is, in fact, a discipleaiming at the truth and excellence that lie beyond earthly and heavenlyjoys. Knowing this, Lord Krishn, the accomplished teacher, tells himthat even if the time allotted to his body expires in the course of the warand he does not succeed in reaching his goal, imbued with divine richeshe will gain an existence in Swar, the changeless and eternal. If, on theother hand, he succeeds in the struggle while his temporal body is stillalive, he will achieve the sublimity of God and thus attain to the state ofthe highest glory. He will thus be a winner both ways: if he conquers hewill attain to the highest state; and if he loses he will find an abode inheaven and enjoy godly pleasures. There is profit in victory and there isprofit too in defeat. The point is reiterated:
38. ?You will not incur sin if you get up and fight the war, treating
victory and defeat, profit and loss, and happiness and sorrow,
alike.??
megKeog:Kes meces ke=âlJee ueeYeeueeYeew peÙeepeÙeew~
lelees ÙegæeÙe ÙegpÙemJe vewJeb heeheceJeehmÙeefme~~38~~
sukhaduÉkhe same kçtvÂ lÂbhÂlÂbhau jayÂjayau |
tato yuddhÂya yujyasva naivaØ pÂpamavÂpsyasi ||38||

Yatharth Geeta 64
Lord Krishn counsels Arjun to regard with an equal mind happiness
and sorrow, profit and loss, and victory and defeat, and prepare for war.
If he participates in the war, he will not be guilty of sin. He will gain thestate of sublimity, the most precious possession that is possible for aman to have, in case of success, and achievement of godhood even incase of defeat. So Arjun should deliberate well on his gains and losses,and prepare for war.
39.  ?This knowledge which I have imparted to you, O Parth, is
related to Gyan Yog, the Way of knowledge, and now you
should listen to me on Karm Yog, the Way of Selfless Action,with which you can successfully sever the fetters of action aswell as its consequence (karm).??
Lord Krishn tells Arjun that the knowledge, he has spoken of, is
related to the Way of Knowledge. What knowledge is it except that
Arjun should fight? The substance of the Way of Discrimination orKnowledge is only that if we fight according to our disposition after acareful appraisal of our capacity as well as of profit and loss, we shallattain to the state of ultimate bliss if we win, and to heavenly, godlikeexistence even if we are vanquished. There is gain in both cases. If wedo not act, others will speak disparagingly of us and look upon us ashaving retreated like cowards, and we shall be disgraced. So to forgeahead on the path of action with a careful understanding of one?s innatenature is itself the Way of Knowledge or Discernment.
We usually come across the misconception that no war needs to
be fought on the Path of Knowledge. It is said that knowledge involvesno action. We think in our vanity: ?I am pure.? ??I am enlightened.?- ??I ama part of God himself.? Accepting it as an axiom that excellence begetsexcellence, we sit idly. But this is not the Way of Knowledge accordingto Yogeshwar Krishn. The ?action? which has to be performed in followingthe Way of Knowledge is similar to that which has to be undertaken for
S<ee lesÓefYeefnlee meeÈ?es yegefæÙeexies eflJeceeb ëe=Ceg~
yegæ?ee Ùegòeâes ÙeÙee heeLe& keâce&yevOeb ØenemÙeefme~~39~~eîÂ te'bhihitÂ sÂàkhye buddhiryoge tvimÂØ ïçàu |
buddhyÂ yukto yayÂ pÂrtha karmabandhaØ prahÂsyasi|39

Chapter 2 65
the Way of Selfless Action. The only difference between the two ways
is that of attitude. The man who treads the Path of Knowledge acts witha proper evaluation of his situation and with self-reliance, whereas theman who takes to the Path of Selfless Action also acts, but with relianceupon the mercy of the adored God. Action is a basic requirement ofboth the ways and in each of them it is the same, although it has to bedone in two different ways. The attitudes behind the action in the twoways are different.
So Lord Krishn asks Arjun to listen to him while he speaks of the
Way of Selfless Action, armed with which he can effectively destroythe bonds of action and its consequence. Here the Yogeshwar has, forthe first time, spoken of karm, although without explaining what it is.Instead of dwelling upon the nature of action, he describes itscharacteristic traits.
40. ?Since selfless action neither wears out the seed from which
it sprang nor has any adverse consequence, even a partial
observance of this dharm liberates (one) from the dire terror(of repeated birth and death)?.
In the performance of action without coveting the fruits thereof,
the initial impulse or the seed is not destroyed. It also does not give
rise to any evil. So selfless action, even though done in small measures,frees us from the great fear represented by birth and death. Thatnecessitates reflecting over the nature of such action and walking atleast a few steps along its path. Worshipers who have renounced thevanity of earthly possessions have trodden this path, but so can thosewho lead the life of householders. Lord Krishn tells Arjun to just sow theseed, for the seed is never destroyed. There is no power in nature, noweapon, which can destroy it. The material world can only cover it upmomentarily and hide it for a while, but it cannot wipe out the initialinspiration, the seed, of the act of spiritual accomplishment.
vesneefYe?eâceveeMeesÓefmle ØelÙeJeeÙees ve efJeÅeles~
mJeuhecehÙemÙe Oece&mÙe $eeÙeles cenlees YeÙeeled~~40~~
nehÂbhikramanÂïo'sti pratyavÂyo na vidyate |
svalpamapyasya dharmasya trÂyate mahato bhayÂt ||40||

Yatharth Geeta 66
According to Lord Krishn, even the gravest of sinners can
doubtlessly cross over by the ark of knowledge. He means exactly this
when he says that if the seed of selfless action is just planted, it isimperishable. It does not even have any adverse outcome in so muchas it does not abandon us midway after showing us how we can progresstowards spiritual attainment. Even if we give it up, it works doggedly onfor our final liberation. This is why selfless action, even in a smallmeasure, provides freedom from the great dread of birth and death.Once planted, even after repeated birth, the seed of such action takesus to the realization of God and to emancipation alike from pleasureand from pain. The question is what we have to do if we choose theWay of Selfless Action.
41. ?On this auspicious path, O Kurunandan (Arjun), the resolute
mind is one, but the minds of the ignorant are divided and
many.??
The mind which is earnestly and firmly oriented to selfless action
is unified. Selfless action is only one and its outcome is also one.
Spiritual accomplishment is the only true achievement, The gradualrealization of this attainment by fighting against forces of the materialworld is an enterprise. This enterprise and resolute action, with a singlegoal are also one and the same. Then what about those who propagatemore than one mode of action? In Lord Krishn?s view they are not trueworshipers. The minds of such men are endlessly divided and that iswhy they conjure up endless ways.
JÙeJemeeÙeeeflcekeâe   yegefæjskesân   kegâ®vevove~
yengMeeKee ¢evevlee§e yegæÙeesÓJÙeJemeeefÙeveeced~~41~~
vyavasÂyÂtmikÂ buddhirekeha kurunandana |
bahuïÂkhÂ hyanantÂïca buddhayo'vyavasÂyinÂm ||41||

Chapter 2 67
42-43. ?Desire-ridden men, O Parth, who are given only to
listening to Vedic promises of rewards for action, who believe
that the attainment of heaven is the highest goal of temporalbirth and its activities, and who speak pretentious words todescribe the many rites and ceremonies that they regard asconducive to the achievement of worldly pleasure and power,are ignorant and bereft of discernment.??
The minds of such men are riddled with endless dissensions.
Covetous and attached to the tempting promises made by Vedic verses,
they regard heaven as the most sublime goal and they believe in nothingbeyond this. Such ignorant men not only devise numerous rites andceremonies, the performance of which is expected to bring such rewardsas the next birth, sensual enjoyment, and worldly dominion, but alsoflaunt them in flowery and affected language. To put it differently, theminds of men without discrimination have infinite divisions. They areaddicted to precepts which promise fruits of action and accept thepledges of the Ved as final and authoritative. They regard heaven asthe highest goal. Because their minds are split by many differences,they invent numerous modes of worship. They do speak of God, butbehind the cover of his name they build up a whole multitude of ritualceremonies. Now, are these activities not a form of action? Lord Krishndenies that these activities are true action. What then is true action?The question remains unanswered at this point. For the time being LordKrishn only states that ignorant minds are divided minds, because ofwhich they formulate an unlimited number of rites and ceremonies thatare not real action. They not only expound them but also give utteranceto them in figurative language. Let us now see the effect of all this.
Ùeeefceceeb hegef<heleeb JeeÛeb ØeJeovlÙeefJeheef§ele:~
JesoJeeojlee: heeLe& veevÙeomleerefle Jeeefove:~~42~~keâeceelceeve: mJeie&heje pevcekeâce&HeâueØeoeced~
ef?eâÙeeefJeMes<eyengueeb  YeesiewÕeÙe&ieeEle  Øeefle~~43~~
yÂmimaØ puîpitÂØ vÂcaØ pravadantyavipaïcitaÉ |
vedavÂdaratÂÉ pÂrtha nÂnyadastÍti vÂdinaÉ ||42||kÂmÂtmÂnaÉ svargaparÂ janmakarmaphalapradÂm |
kriyÂviïeîabahulaØ bhogaiïvaryagatiØ prati ||43||

Yatharth Geeta 68
44. ?Delighted by ornamental words and attached to worldly
pleasures and dominance, men without discrimination have
irresolute minds.?
Minds which are affected by the tempting words of such people
are also corrupted and they also fail to accomplish what is worthwhile.
The people whose minds are enamoured of such words, and who areattached to sensual enjoyment and temporal power, are deprived oftheir capacity for action; they are bereft of resolve for the true actionthat is a prerequisite of contemplation of the worshiped God.
But who are the people that lend their ears to these unwise men?
Of course, rather than being knowers of the Self within and the SupremeSpirit without, they are the ones who are addicted to sensual pleasureand temporal power. The minds of such men are lacking in will for theaction that is needed for the ultimate union of the Self with the SupremeSpirit.
What exactly is the meaning of the assertion that they, too, are
mistaken who are blindly devoted to Vedic pronouncements? Lord Krishnspeaks about this:
45. ?Since all the Ved, O Arjun, only illumine the three properties,
you should rise above them, be free from the contradictions
of happiness and sorrow, rest on that which is constant, andbe unconcerned with getting what you do not have as well aswith protecting what you have, in order to dedicate yourselfto the Self within.?
The Ved only illumine the three properties of nature; they know
nothing of what is beyond them. So Arjun should go beyond the sphere
YeesiewÕeÙe&Øemeòeâeveeb     leÙeeheùleÛeslemeeced~
JÙeJemeeÙeeeflcekeâe yegefæ: meceeOeew ve efJeOeerÙeles~~44~~
$ewiegCÙeefJe<eÙee Jesoe efve?ewiegCÙees YeJeepeg&ve~
efveÉ&vÉes efvelÙemeòJemLees efveÙeexie#esce DeelceJeeved~~45~~
bhogaiïvaryaprasaktÂnÂØ tayÂpahçtacetasÂm |
vyavasÂyÂtmikÂ buddhiÉ samÂdhau na vidhÍyate ||44||
traiguàyaviïayÂ vedÂ nistraiguàyo bhavÂrjuna |
nirdvandvo nityasattvastho niryogakîema ÂtmavÂn ||45||

Chapter 2 69
of action laid down by the Ved. How to do this? Lord Krishn advises
Arjun to liberate himself from the conflicts of joy and sorrow, concentrateon the one changeless reality, and desire neither the unobtained nor theobtained; so that he may devote himself single-mindedly to the indwellingSelf. This is how he can rise above the Ved. But is there any precedenceof anyone going beyond them? Lord Krishn says that as a mantranscends the Ved, even so he comes face to face with the SupremeSpirit, and that the man who is aware of him is a true Vipr, a Brahmin.
46. ?After the final absolution a man does not need the Ved, just
as we do not need a pond when there is the all-stretching
ocean (around).??
When a man is surrounded by the ocean on all sides, he has no
use for a pond. Just so, a Brahmin who has gained knowledge of the
Supreme Spirit has no use for the Ved. That means that the one whoknows God transcends the Ved, and that man is a Brahmin. So LordKrishn counsels Arjun to rise above the Ved and be a Brahmin.
Arjun is a Kshatriy and Lord Krishn is exhorting him to be a Brahmin.
Brahmin and Kshatriy are, among others, names of qualities that areinherent in the dispositions of different varn (or what are now morecommonly known as castes). But the varn-tradition is originally, as wehave already seen, action-oriented rather than a social provisiondetermined by birth. What use has he for a petty pond who has availedhimself of the crystal current of the Ganga? Some use a pond for ablution,while others wash their cattle in it. A sage who has known God by directperception has the same kind of use for the Ved. They are undoubtedlyuseful. The Ved exists for stragglers who lag behind. Further elucidationof the problem begins from this point. Subsequently Lord Krishnexpounds the precautions to be observed in the performance of action.
ÙeeJeeveLe& Goheeves meJe&le: mechuegleesokesâ~
leeJeevmeJex<eg Jesos<eg yeÇeÿeCemÙe efJepeevele:~~46~~
yÂvÂnartha udapÂne sarvataÉ samplutodake |
tÂvÂnsarveîu vedeîu brÂhmaàasya vijÂnataÉ ||46||

Yatharth Geeta 70
47. ?Since you are entitled only to the performance of action but
never to the fruits thereof, you should neither desire rewards
of action nor be drawn to inaction.?
Arjun, Lord Krishn says, has the right to action but not to its
results. So Arjun should persuade himself that fruits of action simply
do not exist. He should not covet these fruits and neither should hegrow disillusioned with action.
So far, Lord Krishn has first used the term ?action? (karm: meaning
both action and its consequence) in the thirty-ninth verse of the chapter,but he has not indicated what this karm is and how to perform it. Hehas, however, described its characteristic traits.
(a) He has told Arjun that by the performance of action he will
be freed from the bonds of action.
(b) He has then said that the seed or initial impulse of action is
indestructible. Once it is initiated, nature has no means todestroy it.
(c) There is, Arjun has been told, not even the slightest flaw in
this action, for it never abandons us while we are strandedamidst the temptations of celestial pleasures and worldlyaffluence.
(d) Arjun! To perform this karm, this ordained action, is Dharm.
Even the least practice of it redeems a man from the cycleof birth and death.
But, as it is evident from the summary above, Lord Krishn has
not so far defined action. As for the way of doing it, he has said in theforty-first verse:
(e) The mind which is resolved to do this action is only one
and the way of doing it is also only one. Does it mean, then,that people engaged in other multifarious activities are not
keâce&CÙesJeeefOekeâejmles cee Heâues<eg keâoeÛeve~
cee keâce&HeâuenslegYet&cee& les meÁesÓmlJekeâce&efCe~~47~~
karmaàyevÂdhikÂraste mÂ phaleîu kadÂcana |
mÂ karmaphalaheturbhörmÂ te saàgo'stvakarmaài ||47||

Chapter 2 71
really engaged in the worship of God? According to Lord
Krishn, the activities of such people are not action.
Explaining why it is so, he adds that the minds of men without
discernment are riven by endless divisions, because of which they tendto invent and elaborate an unlimited number of rites and ceremonies.So they are not true worshipers. They use pretentious and ornatelanguage to describe these rites and ceremonies. So that man?s mindis also poisoned who is lured by the charm of their words. Such personsget trapped in infinite shackles of the cycles of birth and death. Theordained action is, therefore, only one, although we have not yet beentold what precisely it is.
In the forty-seventh verse Lord Krishn has told Arjun that he has
a right to action, but not to its fruits. So Arjun should not desire thesefruits. At the same time he ought not to lose faith in the performance ofaction. In other words, he should be constantly and devotedly engagedin its performance. But Lord Krishn has not yet said what this action is.The verse is usually interpreted as meaning: Do whatever you wish,only do not desire its fruits. That is, say those who interpret the versethus, what selfless action is all about. In fact, however, Lord Krishn hasnot so far told us what this action is that men are required to do. He hasso far elaborated only its characteristics, what the gains from it are,and the precautions that have to be observed in the course of itsperformance. Yet the question of what exactly selfless action is has sofar remained unanswered. It is, in fact, answered only in Chapters 3and 4.
 Lord Krishn again reverts to what he has already said:
48. ??The equipoise of mind that arises from profound absorption
in the performance of action after renouncing attachment andbeing even-minded in respect of success and failure is, ODhananjay (Arjun), given the name of yog.?
ÙeesiemLe: kegâ® keâcee&efCe meÁb lÙekeälJee OeveÀeÙe~
efmeæ?eefmeæ?ees: mecees YetlJee mecelJeb Ùeesie GÛÙeles~~48
yogasthaÉ kuru karmÂài saßgaØ tyaktvÂ dhanaájaya |
siddhyasiddhyoÉ samo bhÂtvÂ samatvaØ yoga ucyate||48

Yatharth Geeta 72
Resting in yog, renouncing infatuation for worldly ties, and looking
at success and failure with an equal mind, Arjun should undertake action.
But what action? Lord Krishn?s pronouncement is that men should doselfless action. Equipoise of mind is what is called yog.  The mind inwhich there is no unevenness is full of equanimity. Greed destroys itsevenness, attachments make it unequal, and desire for the fruits ofaction destroy its serenity. That is why there should be no hankeringafter the fruits of action. At the same time, however, there should alsobe no diminishing of faith in the performance of action. Renouncingattachment to all things, seen as well as unseen, and giving up allconcern about achievement and non-achievement, we should only keepour eyes fixed on yog, the discipline that joins the individual Soul withthe Supreme Spirit, and lead a life of strenuous action.
Yog is thus the state of culmination. But it is also the initial stage.
At the outset our eyes should be fixed on the goal. It is for this reasonthat we should act keeping our eyes on yog. Equanimity of mind is alsonamed yog. When the mind cannot be shaken by failure and success,and nothing can destroy its evenness, it is said to be in the state ofyog. It cannot then be moved by passion. Such a state of mind enablesthe Soul to identify himself with God. This is another reason why thisstate is called Samattwa Yog, the discipline that makes the mind filledwith equanimity. Since there is, in such a state of mind, completerenunciation of desire, it is also called the Way of Selfless Action(Nishkam Karm Yog). Since it requires us to perform action, it is alsoknown as the way of Action (Karm Yog). Since it unites the Self withthe Supreme Spirit, it is called yog. It is necessary to keep in mind thatboth success and failure should be viewed with equanimity, that thereshould be no sense of attachment, and that there is no desire for therewards of action. It is thus that the Way of Selfless Action and theWay of Knowledge are the same:

Chapter 2 73
49. ?Take refuge in the way of equanimity (yog), Dhananjay,
because action with desire for the fruits thereof is far inferior
to the path of discrimination, and they are indeed pauperswho are motivated by lust (for rewards).??
Covetous action is distant from and inferior to the Path of
Discrimination. Those who yearn after praise are wretched men, vile
and devoid of judgement. Arjun is, therefore, urged to find shelter in theeven-minded Way of Knowledge. Even if the Soul is rewarded withwhat he desires, he will have to assume a body in order to enjoy it. Solong as the process of coming and going, of birth and death, lasts, howcan there be ultimate redemption? A seeker should not desire evenabsolution, for absolution is total freedom from passions. Thinking overthe acquisition of rewards if he gets any, his worship is interrupted.Why should he now continue any further with the task of meditation onGod? He goes astray. So yog should be observed with a perfectly evenmind.
Lord Krishn describes the Way of Knowledge (Gyan-Karm-Sanyas
Yog) as also the Buddhi-or Sankhya Yog. He suggests to Arjun that hehas attempted to enlighten him on the nature of ?discrimination? in itsrelation to the Way of Knowledge. In truth, the only difference betweenthe two is that of attitude. In the one, one has to proceed only aftermaking a proper examination of the constructive and negative aspectsof the undertaking, while in the other, too, equanimity has to bepreserved. So it is also called the Way of Equanimity and Discrimination(Samattwa-Buddhi Yog). Because of this and because men possessedof desire for rewards are reduced to miserable wretchedness, Arjun isadvised to find shelter in the Way of Knowledge.
otjsCe  ¢eJejb  keâce&  yegefæÙeesieeæveÀeÙe~
yegæew MejCeceefvJeÛÚ ke=âheCee: HeâuensleJe:~~49~~
döreàa hyavaraØ karma buddhiyogÂddhanaájaya |
buddhau ïaraàamanviccha kçpaàÂÉ phalahetavaÉ ||49||

Yatharth Geeta 74
50. ?As the Soul endowed with a mind of equanimity renounces
both meritorious and evil deeds in this world itself and the
art of acting with equipoise is yog, the endeavour to masterthe way of equanimity of discrimination is Samattwa Yog.??
Stoic minds give up both the sacred and the sinful in this life
itself. They adopt an attitude of detachment to both. So Arjun should
strive for the equanimity of mind that is derived from the Way ofKnowledge. Yog is the skill of acting with equipoise.
Two attitudes towards action prevail in the world. If people do a
work, they also wish for its fruits. If there are no rewards, they may noteven like to work. But Yogeshwar Krishn regards such action asbondage and states that worship of the one God is the only worthwhileaction. In the present chapter he has only named action. Its definitionis given in the ninth verse of Chapter 3; and its nature is dwelt upon atlength in Chapter 4. In the verse about to be quoted, the skill of actingin freedom from worldly customs is that we should perform action anddo it with dedication, but at the same time with voluntary renunciationof any right to its fruits. However, it is but natural to be curious aboutwhat will become of these fruits. But, of course, there is no doubt thatselfless action is the right way of action. The whole energy of thedesireless worshiper is then directed to his action. The human body ismeant for worship of God. At the same time, though, one would like toknow whether one has just always to go on acting or whether theperformed action will also produce some result. Lord Krishn now dwellsupon this problem:
51. ?Renouncing all desire for the fruits of their action and (thus)
freed from the bondage of birth, wise men who are skilled in
yegefæÙegòeâes  peneleern  GYes  megke=âleog<ke=âles~
lemceeÅeesieeÙe ÙegpÙemJe Ùeesie: keâce&meg keâewMeueced~~50~~keâce&peb yegefæÙegòeâe efn Heâueb lÙekeälJee ceveeref<eCe:~
pevceyevOeefJeefvece&gòeâe: heob ieÛÚvlÙeveeceÙeced~~51~~
buddhiyukto jahÂtÍha ubhe sukçtaduîkçte |
tasmÂdyogÂya yujyasva yogaÉ karmasu kauïalam ||50||karmajaØ buddhiyuktÂ hi phalaØ tyaktvÂ manÍîiàaÉ |
janmabandhavinirmuktÂÉ padaØ gacchantyanÂmayam||51

Chapter 2 75
the way of equanimity and  discrimination achieve the pure,
immortal state.??
Wise men endowed with the yog of discrimination renounce the
fruits arising from their action and are liberated from the bondage of
birth and death. They achieve the pure, immortal state of oneness withGod.
Application of intellect is categorized here into three kinds. Firstly,
by the way of discrimination (in verse 39), this yields two results: Divineriches and ultimate bliss. Secondly, by the way of selfless action (inverse 51) which produces only one consequence-liberation from thedire terror of repeated birth and death by attaining immaculateindestructible oneness with God. These are the only two ways describedfor the yog. The third type of application of intellect is done by theignorant who are engaged in other endless modes of actions and whofall into the cycles of repeated birth and death according to their deeds.
Arjun?s vision is limited only to acquisition of sovereignty over
the three worlds and even over gods. But even for the sake of these heis not inclined to war. At this point, Lord Krishn reveals to him the truththat a man can attain to the immortal state through selfless action. TheWay of Selfless Action also provides access to the state of being whichdeath cannot break into. At what point, though, will a man be inclined tothe performance of such action?
52. ?At the time when your mind has successfully made its way
across the swamp of attachment, you will be capable of the
renunciation which is worth hearing of and which you haveheard.??
The very moment Arjun?s mind, indeed the mind of any worshiper,
has steered safely across the marsh of attachment, and when it is
completely free from yearning for either children or riches or honour, all
Ùeoe les ceesnkeâefueueb yegefæJÙe&efleleefj<Ùeefle~
leoe ievleeefme efveJexob ßeesleJÙemÙe ßeglemÙe Ûe~~52~~
yadÂ te mohakalilaØ buddhirvyatitariîyati |
tadÂ gantÂsi nirvedaØ ïrotavyasya ïrutasya ca ||52||

Yatharth Geeta 76
its worldly ties are broken. It will then be receptive, not only to what is
proper for hearing, but also to the idea of renunciation, making it anintegral part of its action according to what it has learnt. At the presentmoment, however, Arjun is unprepared to listen to what is proper forhearing; and so the question of its influencing his conduct, of course,simply does not arise. Lord Krishn again illumines the same worthiness:
53. ?When your mind, now shaken by the conflicting precepts of
the Ved, achieves a changeless and constant existence within
the being of Supreme Spirit, you will then attain to immortalstate through profound meditation.??
When Arjun?s mind, at present riven through and through by the
contradictory teachings of the Ved
5, achieves the state of steady
contemplation of God, it will become changeless and constant, and
then he will master the skill of even-minded discrimination. He will thenachieve the perfect equilibrium which is the ultimate state of immortality.This is the crowning point of yog. The Ved undoubtedly instruct us; butas Lord Krishn points out, the contradictory injunctions of the Shruticonfuse the mind. Precepts there are many, but it is unfortunate thatpeople usually keep away from the knowledge that is fit for learning.
Arjun is told that he will reach the stage of immortality, the
culmination of yog, when his agitated mind achieves constancy bymeditation. This naturally whets Arjun?s curiosity about the nature ofsages who exist in an exalted state of perfect spiritual bliss, and whoseminds are immovable and at peace in the state of abstract meditation.So he asks Lord Krishn:
ßegefleefJeØeefleheVee les Ùeoe mLeemÙeefle efve§euee~
meceeOeeJeÛeuee yegefæmleoe ÙeesieceJeehmÙeefme~~53~~
5. The first part of the Ved, known as ?Works? (Shruti), the Ved known by revelation,
and chiefly made up of hymns and instructions regarding sacred rites and
ceremonies. The second part, known as ?Knowledge? (Smriti), is made up of the
Upanishad that are concerned with awareness of God, the highest aspect ofsacred truth.ïrutivipratipannÂ te yadÂ sthÂsyati niïcalÂ |
samÂdhÂvacalÂ buddhistadÂ yogamavÂpsyasi ||53||

Chapter 2 77
54. ?Arjun said, ?what, O Keshav, is the mark of the man who has
attained to the state of true meditation and equanimity of mind,
and how does this man with firm discrimination speak, sit,and walk????
That Soul which has resolved his doubts is in the state of samadhi
or perfect absorption of thought in the Supreme Spirit, the one worthy
object of meditation. One who has achieved even-minded discriminationby identification with the eternal essence, which has neither a beginningnor an end, is said to be in the state of abstract contemplation of thenature of the Supreme Spirit. Arjun asks Lord Krishn for the qualities ofthe man with a mind of equanimity engaged in such contemplation.How does a man with steadfast wisdom speak? How does he sit? Whatis his gait? Arjun has thus asked four questions. Thereupon Lord Krishnsays:
55. ??The Lord said, ?A man is then said to be steadfast in mind
when he has renounced all the desires of his mind and
achieved contentment of the Self through the Self.???
When a man has renounced all his desires and achieved his Soul?s
contentment through the contemplation of his Soul, he is said to be a
man of firm discernment. This Self is apprehended only through completeabandonment of passion. The sage who has viewed the ineffable beautyof his Self and found perfect satisfaction in him is the man with a steadyjudgement.
56. ?He is indeed a steady-minded sage who is unmoved by
sorrow and indifferent to happiness, and who has overcome
his passion, fear and anger.??
Depeg&ve GJeeÛe-
efmLeleØe%emÙe keâe Yee<ee meceeefOemLemÙe kesâMeJe~efmLeleOeer: efkebâ ØeYee<esle efkeâceemeerle ?epesle efkeâced~~54~~ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-Øepeneefle Ùeoe keâeceevmeJee&vheeLe& ceveesieleeved~DeelcevÙesJeelcevee leg°: efmLeleØe%emleoesÛÙeles~~55~~og:Kes<JevegefÉie>cevee: megKes<eg efJeielemhe=n:~JeerlejeieYeÙe?eâesOe: efmLeleOeerceg&efve®ÛÙeles~~56~~
arjuna uvÂca-
sthitaprajáasya kÂ bhÂîÂ samÂdhisthasya keïava |sthitadhÍÉ kiØ prabhÂîeta kimÂsÍta vrajeta kim ||54||ïrÍbhagavanuvÂca-prajahÂti yadÂ kÂmÂnsarvÂnpÂrtha manogatÂn |ÂtmanyevÂtmanÂ tuîòaÉ sthitaprajáastadocyate ||55||duÉkheîvanudvignamanÂÉ sukheîu vigataspçhaÉ |vÍtarÂgabhayakrodhaÉ sthitadhÍrmunirucyate ||56||

Yatharth Geeta 78
He whose mind is untroubled by bodily, natural disastrous, and
worldly sorrows, and who has rid himself of desire for physical pleasures,
and whose passions, fear, and anger have been subdued, is the sagewith discrimination who has achieved the culmination of spiritualdiscipline. Lord Krishn then points out other qualities of this saintlyman:
57. ?That man has a steady mind who is entirely free from
attachment and who neither gloats over success nor abhors
failure.?
That man has a firm wisdom who is totally free from infatuation
and who neither welcomes good fortune nor repudiates misfortune. That
alone is auspicious which draws a Soul to the being of God, whereasthat which pulls the mind to temptations of the material world isinauspicious. The man of discrimination is not too happy in favourablecircumstances and he also does not scorn adversities, because neitheris the object which is fit for attainment different from him nor is there forhim any evil that may sully the purity of his mind. That is to say that hehas now no need for further striving.
58. ?As a turtle pulls in its limbs, this man reins in his senses
from all objects, and then he truly has a steady mind.??When a man pulls back his senses from all sides and restrains
them within his mind like a turtle pulling its head and feet within its
shell, his mind is steady. But it is only an analogy. As soon as the turtleknows that the danger is gone, it again expands its limbs. Does a manof steadfast wisdom also, in the same way, let his senses loose afterrestraining them, and resume enjoyment of worldly pleasures?
Ùe: meJe&$eeveefYemvesnmleòelØeehÙe MegYeeMegYeced~
veeefYevevoefle ve Ésef° lemÙe Øe%ee Øeefleef?lee~~57~~Ùeoe mebnjles ÛeeÙeb ketâceexÓÁeveerJe meJe&Me:~
FefvõÙeeCeerefvõÙeeLexYÙemlemÙe Øe%ee Øeefleef?lee~~58~~
yaÉ sarvatrÂnabhisnehastattatprÂpya ïubhÂïubham |
nÂbhinandati na dveîòi tasya prajáÂ pratiîòhitÂ ||57||yadÂ saØharate cÂyaØ körmo'àgÂnÍva sarvaïaÉ |
indriyÂàÍndriyÂrthebhyastasya prajáÂ pratiîòhitÂ ||58||

Chapter 2 79
59. ?While objects of sensual pleasure cease to be for the man
who withdraws his senses from them, his desire for these
objects yet remains; but the desires of the man of dis-crimination are completely erased by his perception of God.??
The objects of sense come to an end for the man who has rejected
them because his senses no longer perceive them, but his desires yet
survive. The feeling of attachment lives on. But the passions of theyogi, the doer of selfless action, are annihilated by his perception of theultimate essence that is God.
The accomplished, or enlightened, sage does not, like the turtle,
re-extend his senses to objects which are pleasing to them. When oncehis senses have shrivelled, all the influences and impressions (sanskar)he has carried with him from a previous existence are irrevocably dead.His senses do not then return to life. By apprehending God through theobservance of the Way of Selfless Action, even the attachments toobjects of sensual pleasure become extinct. Force has often been afeature of meditation, and by its use seekers rid themselves of objectsof sense. But thoughts of these objects persist. These attachmentsare brought to an end only with the perception of God and never beforethat, because before this stage residues of matter persist.
In this connection, my Most Revered teacher Shree Parmanand
Ji used to cite an event from his own life. He had heard three voicesfrom heaven when he was about to give up home. We respectfullyasked him why these voices from heaven came to him alone; there hadnot been any for us. He replied that he, too, had the same doubt. Butthen he had an intuition that he had been an ascetic during his lastseven births. During the first four of these he had only roamed aboutgarbed in a holy man?s paraphernalia, with a sandal paste mark on hisforehead, ash rubbed on his body, and carrying the water pot used byascetics. He had then lived in ignorance of yog. But during the last
efJe<eÙee efJeefveJele&vles efvejenejmÙe osefnve:~
jmeJepeË jmeesÓhÙemÙe hejb Â<?dJee efveJele&les~~59~~
viîayÂ vinivartante nirÂhÂrasya dehinaÉ |
rasavarjaØ raso'pyasya paraØ driîòvÂ nivartate ||59||

Yatharth Geeta 80
three births he had been a true saint, as such a Soul should be; and
there was now the awakening of the way of yog in him. In the last life,final liberation had been almost at hand and the end was in view, but acouple of his desires had remained. Although he had firmly controlledhis outward body, there were these passions within him. That was whyhe had to go through yet another birth. And in this birth, within a limitedtime God had freed him from all his passions, rendered him tworesounding slaps as it were by providing him with all sights and sounds,and made him a true sadhu.
Lord Krishn means precisely the same when he proclaims that
although a man?s association with objects of sense ends when herestrains them from reacting to these objects, he is rid of desire forthese objects only when he knows his own Self as the identical Godthrough meditation. So we have to act until we have achieved thisperception. Goswami Tulsidas has also said that at first there arepassions in the heart, which are swept away only by true devotion toGod.
Lord Krishn speaks about how difficult it is to withdraw the senses
from their objects:
60-61. ?O son of Kunti, men ought to subdue their senses which
seize forcibly even wise and striving minds, and devote
themselves to me with perfect concentration, because onlythat man?s mind is unwavering  who has achieved control ofhis senses.?Mutinous senses ravish even discerning and active minds, and
undo their steadiness. So with full control over his senses, equippedwith yog and devotion, Arjun should find shelter in God, of whom LordKrishn is an incarnation, for that man alone has a firm mind who has
Ùelelees ¢eefhe keâewvlesÙe heg®<emÙe efJeheef§ele:~
FefvõÙeeefCe ØeceeLeerefve njefvle ØemeYeb ceve:~~60~~
leeefve meJee&efCe mebÙecÙe Ùegòeâ Deemeerle celhej:~
JeMes efn ÙemÙesefvõÙeeefCe lemÙe Øe%ee Øeefleef?lee~~61~~
yatato hyapi kaunteya puruîasya vipaïcitaÉ |
indriyÂni pramÂthÍni haranti prasabhaØ manaÉ ||60||
tÂni sarvÂài saØyamya yukta ÂsÍta matparaÉ |
vaïe hi yasyendriyÂài tasya prajáÂ pratiîòhitÂ ||61||

Chapter 2 81
subdued his senses. Here Yogeshwar Krishn explains what ought to be
prevented in the course of worship, as also the components of spiritualseeking which it is the duty of men to undertake. Restraint and prohibitionalone cannot subdue the senses. Along with negation of senses theremust also be incessant contemplation of the desired God. In the absenceof such reflection, the mind will be preoccupied with material objects,the evil consequence of which we see in the words of Lord Krishn himself.
62. ?They whose thoughts are of sensual objects are attached to
them, attachment gives rise to desires, and anger is born
when these desires are obstructed.??
The feeling of attachment persists in men who have yet got over
their concern with the objects of sense. Desire is born from attachment.
And there is anger when there is an obstacle in the way of satisfactionof desire. And what does the feeling of anger give rise to?
63. ?Delusion is born from anger, by which memory is confused;
confusion of memory undermines the faculty of
discrimination and, when discrimination is lost, the seekerdeviates from the means of absolution.??
Confusion and ignorance arise from anger. Distinction between
the eternal and the transient is obliterated. Remembrance is shaken by
delusion, as it happens with Arjun.  Lord Krishn says again that in sucha state of mind one cannot determine wisely what to do and what not todo. Confusion of memory weakens the seeker?s dedication and loss ofdiscrimination makes him deviate from his goal of being one with God.
Here Lord Krishn has emphasized the importance of cultivating
unconcern with sensual objects. The worshiper?s mind should ratheralways be concerned with that-word, form, incarnation, or abode-by which
OÙeeÙelees  efJe<eÙeevhegbme:  meÁmles<ethepeeÙeles~
meÁelmeÀeeÙeles keâece: keâeceel?eâesOeesÓefYepeeÙeles~~62~~
?eâesOeeÆJeefle mecceesn: mecceesnelmce=efleefJeYeüce:~
mce=efleYeübMeeod yegefæveeMees yegefæveeMeelØeCeMÙeefle~~63~~
dhyÂyato viîayÂnpuØsaÉ saßgasteîöpajÂyate |
saßgÂtsaájÂyate kÂmaÉ kÂmÂtkrodho'bhijÂyate ||62||
krodhÂdbhavati sammohaÉ sammohÂtsmçtivibhramaÉ|
smçtibhraØïÂd buddhinÂïo buddhinÂïÂtpraàaïyati ||63||

Yatharth Geeta 82
his mind may be enabled to be one with God. The mind is drawn to
sensual objects when the discipline of worship is relaxed. Thoughts ofthese objects produce attachment, which in its own turn results in desirefor them. Anger is generated if the satisfaction of this desire is obstructedin any way. And ignorance finally undoes the power of discernment.The Way of Selfless Action is also said to be the Way of Knowledge,for it has always to be kept in view that desire must not be allowed toenter the worshiper?s mind. There are, after all, no real fruits. Advent ofdesire is inimical to wisdom. Steady contemplation is, therefore, anecessity. A man who does not always think of God strays from theright path that will lead him to ultimate bliss and glory. However, thereis one consolation. The chain of worship is only broken, not completelydestroyed. Once the joy of worship has been experienced, when takenup again, it resumes from the same point at which it was discontinued.
This is the fate of the worshiper who is attached to sensual
objects. But what is the lot of the seeker who has mastered his mindand heart?
64. ?But that man achieves spiritual tranquility who has mastered
his mind, and who remains unaffected by sense-objects
although he may be roaming amidst them, because his sensesare properly restrained.?
Possessed of the means of spiritual realization, the sage who
has experienced an intuitive perception of the identity of Self and the
Supreme Spirit achieves the state of the most sublime peace, becausehe has subdued his senses, and therefore remained untouched by theirobjects even though he may be wandering in their midst. No prohibitionsare needed for such a man. There is for him nothing unpropitiousanywhere against which he should fight and defend himself. There isalso for him no good for which he should yearn.
jeieÉs<eefJeÙegòewâmleg  efJe<eÙeeefveefvõÙew§ejved~
DeelceJeMÙewe|JeOesÙeelcee ØemeeoceefOeieÛÚefle~~64~~
rÂgadveîaviyuktaistu viîayÂnindriyaiïcaran |
ÂtmavaïyairvidheyÂtmÂ prasÂdamadhigacchati ||64||

Chapter 2 83
65. ?After realizing the ultimate repose, all his (the seeker?s)
sorrows disappear, and the blissful mind of such a man
quickly grows in firmness.??
Blessed with a vision of God?s ineffable glory and his divine grace,
all the worshiper?s griefs-the temporal world and its objects which are
the abode of all sorrows-vanish and his power of discrimination growsstrong and steady. Hereafter, Lord Krishn dwells upon the lot of thosewho have not achieved the saintly condition:
66. ?A man without spiritual accomplishment has no wisdom
nor true faith, and a man without devotion knows no peace
of mind. Since happiness depends on peace, how can suchmen be happy??
A man who has not undertaken meditation is devoid of selfless
action-oriented wisdom. This impoverished man is even deficient in the
feeling of devotion to the all-pervading Spirit. How can such a man,without an awareness of the Self within and the God without, be atpeace? And how can he, without peace, experience happiness? Therecan be no devotion without knowing the object of devotion and knowledgecomes from contemplation. Without devotion there can be no peaceand a man with a disturbed mind cannot experience happiness, muchless the state of changeless, eternal bliss.
67. ?For, as the wind captures the boat on water, just so even
one of the senses, that roam amidst objects of their
gratification and with which the intellect dwells, is strongenough to sweep away the discrimination of one who isunpossessed of spiritual attainment.??
Øemeeos meJe&og:Keeveeb neefvejmÙeeshepeeÙeles~
ØemeVeÛeslemees ¢eeMeg yegefæ: heÙe&Jeefle?les~~65~~veeefmle yegefæjÙegòeâmÙe ve ÛeeÙegòeâmÙe YeeJevee~
ve ÛeeYeeJeÙele: MeeefvlejMeevlemÙe kegâle: megKeced~~66~~
FefvõÙeeCeeb efn Ûejleeb ÙevceveesÓveg efJeOeerÙeles~leomÙe njefle Øe%eeb JeeÙegvee&JeefceJeecYeefme~~67~~
prasÂde sarvaduÉkhÂnÂØ hÂnirasyopajÂyate |
prasannacetaso hyÂïu buddhiÉ paryavatiîòhate ||65||nÂsti buddhirayuktasya na cÂyuktasya bhÂvanÂ |
na cÂbhÂvayataÉ ïÂntiraïÂntasya kutaÉ sukham ||66||
indriyÂàÂØ hi caratÂØ yanmano'nu vidhÍyate |tadasya harati prajáÂØ vÂyurnÂvamivÂmbhasi ||67||

Yatharth Geeta 84
As the wind drives a boat far away from its destination, even one
out of the five senses roving amongst objects perceived by the intellect
can get hold of the man who has not undertaken the task of spiritualquest and discipline. Therefore incessant remembrance of God isessential. Lord Krishn again dwells upon the importance of action-orientedconduct.
68. ??Therefore, O the mighty-armed (Arjun), the man who prevents
his senses from straying to objects has a steady
discrimination.?
The man who restricts his senses from being drawn to their objects
is a man of steady wisdom. ?Arm? is a measure of the sphere of action.
God is called ?mighty-armed? (mahabahu), although he is bodiless andworks everywhere without hands and feet. The one who becomes onewith him or is inclined to him and is on the way to his sublime splendouris also therefore, ?mighty-armed.? That is the significance of the use ofthis epithet for both Lord Krishn and Arjun.
69. ?The true worshiper (yogi) remains awake amidst what is night
for all creatures, but the perishable and transient worldly
pleasures amidst which all living creatures stay awake arelike night for the sage who has perceived reality.?
The transcendental Spirit is like night for living beings because
he can be neither seen nor comprehended by thought. So he is like
night, but it is in this night that the spiritually conscious man remainsawake because he has seen the formless and known theincomprehensible. The seeker finds access to God through control ofsenses, peace of mind, and meditation. That is why the perishableworldly pleasures for which living beings toil day after day is night forGod?s true worshiper.
lemceeÅemÙe ceneyeenes efveie=nerleeefve meJe&Me:~
FefvõÙeeCeerefvõÙeeLexYÙemlemÙe Øe%ee Øeefleef?lee~~68~~Ùee efveMee meJe&Yetleeveeb lemÙeeb peeiee|le mebÙeceer~
ÙemÙeeb pee«eefle Yetleeefve mee efveMee heMÙelees cegves:~~69~~
tasmÂdyasya mahÂbÂho nigçhÍtÂni sarvaïaÉ |
indriyÂàÍndriyÂrthebhyastasya prajáÂ pratiîòhitÂ ||68||yÂ niïÂ sarvabhötÂnÂØ tasyÂØ jÂgarti saØyamÍ |
yasyÂØ jÂgrati bhötÂni sÂ niïÂ païyato muneÉ ||69||

Chapter 2 85
The sage alone, who beholds the individual Self and the Universal
Self and is indifferent to desire, succeeds in his enterprise of God-
realization. So he dwells in the world and is yet untouched by it. Let usnow see what Lord Krishn has to say on the way in which this realizedsage conducts himself.
70. ?As the water of the many rivers falls into the full and ever
constant ocean without affecting its tranquility, even so the
pleasures of sense merge into a man of steady discriminationwithout producing any deviation, and such a man attains tothe state of the most sublime peace rather than yearn forsensual enjoyment.??
The full and changeless ocean assimilates all the rivers that flow
violently into it without losing its repose. Similarly the man who is aware
of the oneness of his Self and the Supreme Spirit assimilates all worldlypleasures within himself without in any way straying from his chosenpath. Rather than longing for sensual gratification, he aims at theachievement of the most sublime bliss of uniting his Self with thesupreme God.
Ravaging everything that comes in their way-crops, men and
animals, and their habitations-and with a frightening roar, the violentlysweeping currents of hundreds of rivers fall into the ocean with atremendous force but they can neither raise nor lower its level by evenan inch; they only merge into the ocean. In the same violent way sensualpleasures assault the sage who has attained knowledge of reality andmerge in him. They can impress on him neither weal nor woe. Theactions of a worshiper are non good and non-evil; they transcend goodand evil. The minds which are conscious of God, restrained anddissolved, bear only the mark of divine excellence. So how can any
DeehetÙe&ceeCeceÛeueØeefle?b
        mecegõceehe:  ØeefJeMeefvle  ÙeÉled~leÉlkeâecee Ùeb ØeefJeMeefvle meJex
        me Meeefvleceehe>esefle ve keâecekeâeceer~~70~~
ÂpöryamÂàamacalapratiîòhaØ
        samudramÂpaÉ praviïanti yadvat |
tadvatkÂmÂ yaØ praviïanti sarve
        sa ïÂntimÂpnoti na kÂmakÂmÍ ||70||

Yatharth Geeta 86
other impression be made on such a mind? The actions of enlightened
yogi are neither auspicious nor inauspicious. In this one verse, thus,Lord Krishn has answered several of Arjun?s queries. Arjun was curiousto learn the mark of a sage who knows the divine reality: how he speaks,how he sits, how he walks. With the single word-??ocean?? -the omniscientLord Krishn answers all these questions. The mark of a sage is that heis like an ocean. Like an ocean he is not bound by rules, that he mustsit like this and walk like that. It is men like him who achieve the ultimatepeace, for they have self-control. They who yearn for pleasure canhave no peace.
71. ??The man who has renounced all desire, and who conducts
himself without ego,  arrogance,  and attachment, is  the one
who achieves peace.??
Men who have given up all desire, and whose actions are entirely
free from the feelings of I and mine, realize the ultimate peace beyond
which there is nothing to strive for and achieve.
72. ?Such, O Arjun, is the steadfastness of the man who has
realized God; after attaining to this state he subdues all
temptation and, resting firmly in his faith, with his death hecontinues in this state of  rapture of the union of his Self withGod.??
Such is the state of one who has realized God. Rivers of temporal
objects merge into these ocean-like sages who are endowed with self
control and an intuitive perception of God. Merely by reading or uttering?aham brahmasmi?, this state can not be attained. By adopting thespiritual practice alone, it can be achieved. Such persons while stayingin the Supreme State attain this Supreme Bliss itself even at the timeof their passing away.
efJeneÙe keâeceevÙe: meJee&vhegceeb§ejefle efve:mhe=n:~
efvece&cees efvejn¿ej: me MeeefvleceefOeieÛÚefle~~71~~S<ee yeÇeÿeer efmLeefle: heeLe& vewveeb ØeehÙe efJeceg¢eefle~
efmLelJeemÙeecevlekeâeuesÓefhe yeÇÿeefveJee&Cece=ÛÚefle~~72~~
vihÂya kÂmÂnyaÉ sarvÂnpumÂØïcarati niÉspçhaÉ |
nirmamo nirahaßkÂraÉ sa ïÂntimadhigacchati ||71||eîÂ brÂhmÍ sthitiÉ pÂrtha nainÂØ prÂpya vimuhyati |
sthitvÂsyÂmantakÂle'pi brahmanirvÂàamçcchati ||72||

Chapter 2 87
???????????????
It is said by some that the Geeta is completed in the second
chapter itself. But the chapter can be accepted as a conclusion only if
all the implications of action (karm) get elucidated by a mere naming ofthe process. In this chapter Lord Krishn has told Arjun to listen to himon the Way of Selfless Action, for by knowing it he will be liberated fromthe shackles of material life. He has the right only to act, but he has noright to the fruits of his action. At the same time he ought not to losededication to action. He must always be prepared to act. By theperformance of such action he secures the most exalted knowledge ofthe Self and of God, and achieves ultimate peace. All this Lord Krishnhas said, but not what action is.
In fact, the section popularly known as ?The Yog or Way of
Discrimination? is not a chapter; it is but a contrivance of reviewersrather than a creation of the poet of the Geeta. There is nothing surprisingin this, because we can at best interpret a work only according to ourown understanding. In this ?chapter?, as we have seen, by expoundingthe merits of action, and by indicating the precautions to be observed inthe performance of action as well as the characteristic marks of thesage who has gained direct knowledge of the Self and God throughperception, Lord Krishn has aroused Arjun?s curiosity and also answeredsome of his queries. The Self is immutable and eternal. Arjun is exhortedto know it in order to learn reality. There are two ways of acquiring thisknowledge, the Way of Discrimination or Knowledge and the Way ofSelfless Action. Performance of the required action after a careful reviewof one?s capacity and self-determination is the Way of Knowledge,whereas applying oneself to the same task with loving dependence onthe worshiped God is the Way of Selfless Action, also known as theWay of Pious Devotion (Bhakti Marg). Goswami Tulsidas has portrayedthe two ways, both leading to ultimate liberation, thus: ?I have two sons.The elder son is a man of discrimination. But the younger one is a mereboy, devoted to me like a faithful servant and desirous only of renderingme service and homage. The latter thus relies on me, whereas the

Yatharth Geeta 88
former depends upon his own prowess. Both of them have, however, to
struggle and fight against the same enemies, namely, passion andanger.??
Lord Krishn says in the same way that he has two kinds of
devotees. There is first the follower of the Way of Knowledge (gyanmargi).Secondly, there is the follower of the Way of Devotion (bhaktimargi).The man of devotion or doer of selfless action finds refuge in God andproceeds on his chosen path with total dependence on his grace.Possessed of confidence in his own strength, on the contrary, the manof discrimination goes along his way after making a proper evaluationof his own ability, as well as of the profit and loss in the enterprise. Butthe two have a common goal and the same enemies. Not only the manof discrimination, but also the man of devotion has to overcome thesame adversaries, namely, anger, desire, and other impieties. Both ofthem have to renounce desire; and the action, too, that has to beperformed under both the disciplines is one and the same. SupremePeace can be attained by performance of this action; yet Lord Krishnhas not at this point explained fully to Arjun what this action is aboutaltogether?
Thus concludes the Second Chapter, in the Upanishad of the
Shreemadbhagwadgeeta, on the Knowledge of the Supreme
Spirit, the Science of Yog, and the Dialogue between
Lord Krishn and Arjun, entitled:
?Karm-Jigyasa??
or
?Curiosity About Action??.
Thus concludes the Most Revered Paramhans Paramanand Ji?s
disciple Swami Adgadanand?s exposition of the Second Chapter
of the Shreemadbhagwadgeeta in ??Yatharth Geeta??, entitled:
?Karm-Jigyasa??.
 HARI OM TAT SAT

Chapter 3 89
CHAPTER 3
URGING THE
ENEMY?S DESTRUCTION
In Chapter 2, Lord Krishn told Arjun that the knowledge he had
discoursed upon was related to the Way of Knowledge. And what is
that knowledge except that Arjun ought to fight? If he is a victor he willbe rewarded with the most exalted state and, even in defeat, he willhave a godly existence in heaven. There is everything in victory,including success, and godhood even in defeat. More or less, in eithercase there is some gain and absolutely no loss. Lord Krishn thenexplained the same knowledge in relation to the Way of Selfless Action,by which Arjun could be completely free from the compulsions of action.He also indicated the characteristic features of the way and stressedthe essential precautions that have to be observed in the course ofsuch action. Arjun will be liberated from the fetters of action if he doesnot desire its fruits and engages in it selflessly, but without any weakeningof his dedication to its performance. However, although ultimately therewill be absolution, this way-the Way of Selfless Action-is one on whichArjun could not see the continuance of his own individual being.
So he thought the Way of Knowledge easier and more readily
accessible than the Way of Selfless Action and wished to know whyLord Krishn was urging him, although he himself believed the Way ofKnowledge to be superior to the Way of Selfless Action, to engage insuch a dreadful act. It was a reasonable query. If we really have to gosomewhere to which there are two ways, we shall surely try to findwhich one of the two is less hazardous. If we do not ask this question,we are not true wayfarers-not true seekers. So Arjun turns to Lord Krishn.

Yatharth Geeta 90
Depeg&ve GJeeÛe-
pÙeeÙemeer Ûeslkeâce&Cemles celee yegefæpe&veeo&ve~
leeflkebâ keâce&efCe Ieesjs ceeb efveÙeespeÙeefme kesâMeJe~~1~~JÙeeefceßesCesJe JeekeäÙesve yegefæb ceesnÙemeerJe cess~
leoskebâ Jeo efveef§elÙe Ùesve ßesÙeesÓnceehvegÙeeced~~2~~1. ?Arjun said, ?O Janardan, if you think knowledge superior to
action, why do you, O Keshav, ask me to engage in fearsome
action?? ??
?Janardan ? is one who is merciful to his people. So Arjun is hopeful
that Lord Krishn will enlighten him on why he is prompting him to adopt
the dreadful way. Arjun finds the way frightening because on this wayhe has only the right to act, but without entitlement at any time to therewards of his action. There should also be no loss of dedication and,with constant submission and his eyes fixed on the way, he has to beincessantly engaged in the task.
Has not Lord Krishn promised him that following the Way of
Knowledge, he will in the case of victory attain to the Supreme Spirit,whereas even in the event of defeat he will be privileged to lead a godlylife? Moreover, he has to proceed on the way only after a due evaluationof his assets and liabilities. So he finds knowledge easier than selflessaction, and he begs of Lord Krishn:
2. ?Since your complex words are so confusing to my mind,
kindly tell me the one way by which I may attain to the state
of blessedness.??
Lord Krishn had, in fact, set out to dispel Arjun?s irresolution, but
his words have only added to his doubts. So he requests Lord Krishn to
tell him unambiguously the one way by which he may achieveemancipation. Lord Krishn then speaks to him.
arjuna uvÂca-
jyÂyasÍ cetkarmaàaste matÂ buddhirjanÂrdana |
tatkiØ karmaài ghore mÂØ niyojayasi keïava ||1||vyÂmiïreàaiva vÂkyena buddhiØ mohayasÍva me |
tadekaØ vada niïcitya yena ïreyo'hamÂpnuyÂm ||2||

Chapter 3 91
ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
ueeskesâÓefmceefvÉefJeOee efve?e hegje Øeesòeâe ceÙeeveIe~%eeveÙeesiesve meeÈ?eeveeb keâce&Ùeesiesve Ùeesefieveeced~~3~~
ve keâce&CeeceveejcYeeVew<keâcÙeË heg®<eesÓëe>gles~
ve Ûe meVÙemeveeosJe efmeefæb meceefOeieÛÚefle~~4~~3. ??The Lord said, ?I told you before, O the sinless (Arjun), two
ways of spiritual discipline, the Way of Discrimination or
Knowledge for sages and the, Way of Selfless Action for menof action.??
?Before? here does not mean a bygone era (yug) like the Satya or
Treta Age
1. It rather refers to the last chapter in which Lord Krishn had
spoken of the two ways, recommending the Way of Knowledge for men
of wisdom and the Way of Selfless Action for those who are activelyengaged in the task that will finally make them one with God. In boththe ways, action has to be performed. So action is an essential.
4. ?Man neither attains to the final state of actionlessness by
desisting from work, nor does he achieve Godlike perfection
by just renunciation of work.??
There is no escape from action. A man cannot achieve the state
of actionlessness by not commencing work, nor can he attain to the
state of divine perfection by merely giving up an undertaken task. So,whether Arjun prefers, the Way of Knowledge or the Way of SelflessAction, he has to toil alike for each of them.
Usually, at this point, seekers on the way to God begin to look for
shortcuts and escapes. We have to be on our guard against the commonmisconception that we become ?selfless doers? just because we do notundertake any work. That is why Lord Krishn emphasizes the point thatone does not achieve the state of actionlessness by just not beginningwork. The point where both good and evil deeds cease completely,where alone there is true ?actionlessness,? can be reached only throughaction. There are the misguided ones, on the other hand, who believe
1. In Indian thought there are four ages (yug) of the world: Satya, Treta, Dwapar, and
Kali (the present age).ïrÍbhagavanuvÂca-
loke'smindvividhÂ niîòhÂ purÂ proktÂ mayÂnagha |jáÂnayogena sÂßkhyÂnÂØ karmayogena yoginÂm ||3||
na karmaàÂmanÂrambhÂnnaiîkarmyaØ puruîo'ïnute |
na ca sannyasanÂdeva siddhiØ samadhigacchati ||4||

Yatharth Geeta 92
ve efn keâef§el#eCeceefhe peeleg efle?lÙekeâce&ke=âled~
keâeÙe&les ¢eJeMe: keâce& meJe&: Øeke=âeflepewieg&Cew:~~5~~
keâcexefvõÙeeefCe mebÙecÙe Ùe Deemles cevemee mcejved~FefvõÙeeLee&efvJecet{elcee efceLÙeeÛeej: me GÛÙeles~~6~~that they are unconcerned with action because they are men of intellect
and discernment, and because there is no action as such on their chosenpath. But they who renounce action under such an impression are notreally men of wisdom. Just renunciation of an undertaken task cannotlead anyone to the attainment of realizing and becoming one with God.
5. ?Since all men have doubtlessly sprung from nature, no one
can at any time live even for a moment without action.?No man can ever even for a fraction of a second live without
action because the three properties of matter born from nature compel
him to act. As long as nature and its properties are, no man can bewithout action.
Lord Krishn says in the thirty-third and thirty-seventh verses of
Chapter 4, that all actions cease to be and dissolve into the most exaltedknowledge: the knowledge obtained from meditation on the sublimetruths which teach man to be aware of his own Self and how he may bereunited with the Supreme Spirit. The fire of this knowledge annihilatesall action. What really the Yogeshwar means by this is that action ceasesto be when yog has gone beyond the three properties of the materialworld, and when a clear outcome of the meditative process comes forthin the form of a direct perception of as well as dissolution of the Self inGod. But before this completion of the ordained task, action does notend and we are not rid of it.
6. ?That deluded man is a dissembler who apparently restrains
his senses by violence but whose mind continues to be
preoccupied with objects of their gratification.?
Such ignorant men who dwell upon sensual objects while
restraining the senses outwardly by hatha-yog are false men and not
na hi kaïcitkîaàamapi jÂtu tiîòhatyakarmakçt |
kÂryate hyavaïaÉ karma sarvaÉ prakçtijairguàaiÉ ||5||
karmendriyÂài saØyamya ya Âste manasÂ smaran |indriyÂrthÂnvimöÅhÂtmÂ mithyÂcÂraÉ sa ucyate ||6||

Chapter 3 93
ÙeefmlJeefvõÙeeefCe cevemee efveÙecÙeejYelesÓpeg&ve~
keâcexefvõÙew: keâce&Ùeesiecemeòeâ: me efJeefMe<Ùeles~~7~~
efveÙeleb kegâ® keâce& lJeb keâce& pÙeeÙees ¢ekeâce&Ce:~
MejerjÙee$eeefhe Ûe les ve Øeefmeæ?esokeâce&Ce:~~8~~men of wisdom at all. It is evident that such practices were prevalent in
the age of Lord Krishn, too. There were some who, instead of practicingwhat ought to be practiced just restrained their senses by unnaturalmeans and claimed that they were wise and perfect. But according toLord Krishn such people are cunning liars. Whether our preference isthe Way of Discrimination or the Way of Selfless Action, work has to beundertaken for each of them.
7. ?And, O Arjun, that man is meritorious who restrains his
senses with his mind and employs his organs of action to do
selfless work in a spirit of complete detachment.??
He is a superior man who exerts inner (rather than external) control
over his senses, so that his mind is freed from passions, and who does
his duty in a state of total desirelessness. Now, although we have knownthat work has to be done, the difficulty is that we do not yet understandthe precise nature of this work. That is also Arjun?s problem and LordKrishn now proceeds to resolve it.
8. ?You ought to do your prescribed action as enjoined by
scripture, for doing work is better than not doing any, and in
the absence of it even the journey of your body may not becompleted.??
Arjun is prompted to do the prescribed action-the ordained task-
which is distinct from all other kinds of work. Performance of this action
is preferable to inaction, because if we do it and traverse even a smallpart of our way, it can rescue us from the great fear of birth and death.Performance of one?s spiritual duty - the ordained action- is, therefore,the better course. By not doing it we cannot even complete the journeyof our Soul through different bodies. This journey is usually interpretedas ?sustenance of the physical body.? But what kind of sustenance is
yastvindriyÂài manasÂ niyamyÂrabhate'rjuna |
karmendriyaiÉ karmayogamasaktaÉ sa viïiîyate ||7||
niyataØ kuru karma tvaØ karma jyÂyo hyakarmaàaÉ |
ïarÍrayÂtrÂpi ca te na prasidhyedakarmaàaÉ ||8||

Yatharth Geeta 94
Ùe%eeLee&lkeâce&CeesÓvÙe$e ueeskeâesÓÙeb keâce&yevOeve:~
leoLeË keâce& keâewvlesÙe cegòeâmeÁ: meceeÛej~~9~~this? Are we a physical body? This Soul, the embodied Self, that we
know by the name of Purush-what else has he been doing except makinghis physical journey through endless lives? When clothes are worn out,we change them and put on new ones. Just so, this whole world, fromthe lowest creatures to the most highly evolved, from Brahma
2 to its
most distant limits, is mutable. Through births, low and high, this Soulhas been making his physical journey since an unknown beginning.Action is something that completes this journey. If there is yet to beanother birth, the journey is still incomplete. The seeker is still on hisway, travelling through bodies. A journey is complete only when thedestination is reached. After being dissolved in God, the Self does nothave to travel any further through physical births. The chain of theSelf?s rejection of old bodies and assumption of new ones is now broken.So action is something that frees the Self, the Purush, from thenecessity of journeying through bodies. Lord Krishn tells Arjun in thesixteenth verse of Chapter 4: ?By this action you shall be freed from theevil that binds the world.? So action, as used in the Geeta, is somethingthat liberates from the bondage of world.
However, the question of what this ordained action is still remains
unresolved. Lord Krishn now begins to answer the question.
9. ?Since the conduct of yagya is the only action and all other
business in which people are engaged are only forms of
worldly bondage, O son of Kunti, be unattached and do yourduty to God well.??
Contemplation of God is the only real action. That conduct is
action which enables the mind to concentrate on God. It is a prescribed
act and, according to Lord Krishn, tasks other than this are only formsof worldly bondage. Anything other than the performance of this yagya
2. The first and the most ancient of the sacred Indian Trinity who is believed to have
presided over the act of creation.yajáÂrthÂtkarmaào'nyatra loko'yaØ karmabandhanaÉ |
tadarthaØ karma kaunteya muktasaßgaÉ samÂcara ||9||

Chapter 3 95
is a form of slavery rather than action. It is important to remind ourselves
once more of Lord Krishn?s injunction to Arjun that he shall be freedfrom the evils of this world only by doing the one real work. Theaccomplishment of this work, of yagya, is action; and Arjun is urged todo it well in a spirit of detachment. It cannot be performed withoutdisinterest in the world and its objects.
So the conduct of yagya is action. But another question that now
arises is what this worthwhile act of yagya is. Before answering thisquestion, however, Lord Krishn first gives a brief account of the originof yagya, as also of what it has to offer. It is only in Chapter 4 that it isclarified what that yagya is-the doing of which is action. It is evidentfrom this that it is Lord Krishn?s way that he first describes thecharacteristic features of the subject he has to elucidate in order tocreate a respectful attitude towards it, then points out the precautionsthat have to be observed in the course of its performance, and onlyfinally expounds the main principle.
Before we proceed, let us recall what Lord Krishn has said of
another aspect of action: that it is a prescribed ordained conduct andthat what is usually done in its name is not true action.
The term ?action? was first used in Chapter 2. Its characteristic
traits as well as the precautions needed for it were pointed out. But thenature of this action has remained unspecified. In Chapter 3, Lord Krishnhas so far said that no one can live without action. Since man lives innature, he must act. Nevertheless there are people who restrain theirsense organs by use of force, but whose minds are still occupied withobjects of the senses. Such people are arrogant and their efforts arevain. So Arjun is told to restrain his senses to perform the ordainedaction. But the question yet remains: what action should he perform?He is told that the accomplishment of yagya is action. But that is notreally answering the question. True that yagya is action; but what isyagya? In the present chapter Lord Krishn only points out the origin andspecial features of yagya, and it is only in Chapter 4 that he will elaboratethe concept of the action which is fit to be done.

Yatharth Geeta 96
menÙe%ee: Øepee: me=°dJee hegjesJeeÛe Øepeeheefle:~
Devesve ØemeefJe<ÙeOJeces<e JeesÓefmlJe°keâeceOegkedâ~~10~~A proper understanding of this definition of action is the key to
our comprehension of the Geeta. All men are engaged in some work or
the other, but that is different from true action. Some of them do farming,while others are engaged in trade and commerce. Some hold positionsof power, while others; are just servants. Some profess that they areintellectuals, while others earn their living by manual labour. Some takeup social service, while others serve the country. And for all theseactivities people have also invented contexts of selfishness andselflessness. But according to Lord Krishn, they simply are not what hemeans by action. Whatever other than yagya is done is only a form ofworldly bondage, not true action. The performance of yagya is the onlyreal action. But instead of explaining what yagya is, he now dwellsupon its genesis.
10. ?At the beginning of kalp-the course of self-realization
Prajapati Brahma shaped yagya along with mankind and
enjoined on them to ascend by yagya which could give themwhat their hearts aspired to.??
Prajapati Brahma, the god presiding over creation, made mankind
along with yagya at the beginning and told men to progress through
yagya. This yagya, wholly propitious, was prescribed or ordained asthe action which would satisfy their hunger for realization of the eternalGod.
Who was the creator of mankind along with yagya? Was it Brahma
and who is he? Is he, as it is believed, the God with four heads andeight eyes? According to Lord Krishn there are no beings like gods. Thesage who has realized and become one with the Supreme Spirit, thefountainhead from which all mankind has arisen, is ??prajapati.?  Wisdomthat results from knowledge of God is itself Brahma. At the moment ofthis realization the mind becomes a mere instrument. It is God himselfwho then speaks through the voice of the sage.
sahayajáÂÉ prajÂÉ sçîòvÂ purovÂca prajÂpatiÉ |
anena prasaviîyadhvameîa vo'stviîòakÂmadhuk ||10||

Chapter 3 97
There is constant growth of wisdom after the commencement of
spiritual adoration, or worship. Since at the beginning this wisdom is
endowed with knowledge of God, it is called brahmvitt . Gradually, as
evil impulses are subdued and the knowledge of God is enriched, thiswisdom is said to be brahmvidwar. As it ascends yet higher and gets
more refined, it comes to be known as brahmvidwariyan. At this stage,
the sage who is blessed with knowledge of God also achieves the capacityto bring others on to the way of spiritual growth. The highest point ofwisdom is brahmvidwarisht, that state of divine inundation in which
the spirit of God flows through it like a crystal current. Men who haveattained to this state enter into and dwell in the Supreme Spirit fromwhom all mankind is born. The minds of such sages are mere instrumentsand it is they who are called ?prajapati.? By dissociating themselvesfrom the contradictions of nature, they create the Self who is yet unawareof the process of meditation or God?s worship. Conferring perfectionwhich is in accordance with the spirit of yagya is the creation of mankind.Prior to this human society is unconscious and chaotic. Creation hasno beginning. Sanskar has always been there: but before the sagesconferred perfection on it, it was deformed and in a state of anarchy. Toshape it in accordance with the requirements of yagya is the act ofrefining and adoring.
Some such accomplished sage or sages created yagya besides
creating mankind at the beginning of kalp, the course of Self-realization.The word ??kalp,? however, also means cure of sickness. Physicianseffect such cures and there are some who even rejuvenate us. But theirremedies are only for ephemeral bodies. The true cure is that whichprovides liberation from the general malady of the world. The beginningof worship or adoration is the commencement of this remedy. Whenmeditation is complete, we are wholly cured.
Thus sages with their beings in the Supreme Spirit gave a proper
shape to spiritual excellence and yagya, and instructed men that theywould prosper through the observance of yagya. By this prosperity theydid not mean that clay houses would change into brick-and-plaster

Yatharth Geeta 98
osJeevYeeJeÙeleevesve les osJee YeeJeÙevleg Je:~
hejmhejb YeeJeÙevle: ßesÙe: hejceJeehmÙeLe~~11~~
F°evYeesieeefvn Jees osJee oemÙevles Ùe%eYeeefJelee:~lewo&òeeveØeoeÙewYÙees Ùees Yeg*ddkeäles mlesve SJe me:~~12~~mansions. Neither did they promise that men would begin to make more
money. They rather wished men to know that yagya would fulfil theirGod-inclined aspirations. A logical question that confronts us here iswhether yagya leads to immediate attainment of God or only by gradualsteps. Brahma further said to mankind:
11. ?And may you cherish gods by yagya and may gods foster
you, for this is the means by which you will finally achieve
the ultimate state.?
Cherishing gods by yagya means fostering sacred impulses. And
that is also how gods foster mankind. Thus, by mutual augmentation
men will ultimately achieve that final bliss after which there is nothingmore to achieve. The deeper we enter into yagya (later yagya will beexplained as a way of worship), the more is the heart enriched withdivinity. The Supreme Spirit is the only God and the means-the impulses-that provide access to that God are the ??divine treasure?? because theybring the ultimate God within reach. This, rather than the commonlyimagined gods such as a piece of stone or mass of water, is the truedivine wealth. In Lord Krishn?s words such gods have no existence. Hefurther adds:
12. ?The gods you foster by yagya will shower upon you without
asking all the joys you wish for, but the man who avails himself
of these joys without having paid for them is truly a thief.?
The divine riches we earn and store by yagya will give us nothing
else besides joys related to the Revered God. They are the only powers
which give. There is no other way to attain to the adored God. The manwho tries to enjoy this state without making an offering of divine riches,the righteous impulses, is doubtlessly a thief who is given nothing. Andsince he gets nothing, what is there for him to enjoy? But he pretends
devÂnbhÂvayatÂnena te devÂ bhÂvayantu vaÉ |
parasparaØ bhÂvayantaÉ ïreyaÉ paramavÂpsyatha ||11||
iîòÂnbhogÂnhi vo devÂ dÂsyante yajáabhÂvitÂÉ |tairdattÂnapradÂyaibhyo yo bhußkte stena eva saÉ ||12||

Chapter 3 99
Ùe%eefMe°eefMeve: mevlees cegÛÙevles meJe&efkeâefuye<ew:~
YegÀeles les lJeIeb heehee Ùes heÛevlÙeelcekeâejCeeled~~13~~all the same that he is perfect, a knower of the essence. Such a braggart
is shy of the path of righteousness and so he is truly a thief (albeit anunsuccessful one). But what do the attainers gain?
13. ??The wise who partake of what is left over from yagya are rid
of all evil, but the sinners who cook only for the sustenance
of their bodies partake of nothing but sin.?
They who subsist on the food derived from yagya are absolved of
all sins. The moment of achievement in the course of augmenting the
divine plenty is also the moment of its completion. When yagya iscomplete, the leftover is God himself. The same has been said by LordKrishn in a different way: the one who feeds on what is generated byyagya merges into the Supreme Spirit. The sage who feeds on God?smanna that issues from yagya is liberated from all sins or, in otherwords, from birth and death. Sages eat for liberation, but a sinner eatsfor the sake of the body that is born through the medium of attachment.He feeds on evil. He may have sung hymns, known the way of worship,and also made a little bit of the way, but despite all this there arises inhim a cloying desire that he should achieve something for the body andits objects of attachment. And it is quite likely that he will also get whathe desires. But then, after this ?joy??, he will find himself stationary atthe very point from which he had begun his spiritual quest. What greaterloss can there be than this? When the body itself is destructible, howlong can its pleasures and joys be with us? So, irrespective of theirdivine adoration, such men partake only of sin.
They are not destroyed, but they do not progress on the way.
That is why Lord Krishn stresses action (worship) undertaken in a self-effacing spirit. He has so far said that the practice of yagya confers thehighest glory and that it is a creation of accomplished realized sages.But why do such sages undertake the shaping and refinement ofmankind?
yajáaïiîòÂïinaÉ santo mucyante sarvakilbiîaiÉ |
bhuájate te tvaghaØ pÂpÂ ye pacantyÂtmakÂraàÂt ||13

Yatharth Geeta 100
DeVeeÆJeefvle Yetleeefve hepe&vÙeeoVemecYeJe:~
Ùe%eeÆJeefle hepe&vÙees Ùe%e: keâce&mecegÆJe:~~14keâce& yeÇÿeesÆJeb efJeefæ yeÇÿee#ejmecegÆJeced~
lemceelmeJe&ieleb yeÇÿe efvelÙeb Ùe%es Øeefleef?leced~~1514. ?All beings get their life from food, food grows from rain,
rain emerges from yagya, and yagya is an outcome of action.?
15. ?Be it known to you that action arose from the Ved and the
Ved from the indestructible Supreme Spirit, so that the all-
pervasive, imperishable God is ever present in yagya.?
All creatures are born from food. Food Is God himself whose
breath is life. A man turns to yagya with his mind fixed on that divine
manna. Food results from rain: not the rain that falls from clouds, butthe shower of grace. The yagya which have been undertaken and storedearlier themselves come down as a shower of grace. Today?s worshipis given back to us as grace the next day. That is why yagya is said togenerate rain. If an indiscriminate oblation or offering to all of the so-called gods and burning of barley grains and oil seeds could producerain, why should deserts have remained barren? Thus rain here is theshower of grace that is an outcome of yagya. This yagya, again, arisesfrom action and is indeed brought to completion by action.
Arjun is told to remember that this action is born from the Ved.
The Ved is the voice of sages who live in God. The vivid perception,rather than cramming of certain verses, of the unmanifest essence isnamed Ved. The Ved is born from the imperishable God
3. The truths of
the Ved have been proclaimed by great souls, but, since they havebecome one with God, the imperishable God himself speaks throughthem. It is for this that the Ved is said to be of divine origin. The Vedcame from God. And the sages, being one with Him, are only instruments.It is he whose spokesmen they are. God manifests himself to them
3. Of the Brihadaranyak Upanishad: ?All Knowledge and all wisdom, what we know
as the Rig Ved, the Yajur Ved, and the rest, have all been breathed forth from the
Eternal. They are the breath of the Eternal.?annÂdbhavanti bhötÂni parjanyÂdannasambhavaÉ |
yajáÂdbhavati parjanyo yajáaÉ karmasamudbhavaÉ ||14karma brahmodbhavaØ viddhi brahmÂkîarasamudbhavam|
tasmÂtsarvagataØ brahma nityaØ yajáe pratiîòhitam ||15

Chapter 3 101
SJeb  ØeJee|leleb  Ûe?ebâ  veevegJele&Ùeleern  Ùe:~
DeIeeÙegefjefvõÙeejecees ceesIeb heeLe& me peerJeefle~~16~~when they have restrained the desires of their mind by yagya. The
omnipresent, ultimate, and imperishable God is, therefore, alwayspresent in yagya. So yagya is the only way to attain to him. This iswhat Lord Krishn tells Arjun:
16. ?The man in this world, O Parth, who loves sensual pleasure
and leads an impious life, and does not conduct himself in
accordance with the thus prescribed cycle (of Self-realization),leads but a futile life.?
The pleasure-loving, sinful man who, despite his birth in human
form, does not conduct himself in keeping with the means of the ordained
action or, to put it differently, does not follow the way of attaining to thestate of immortality through fostering gods and so also himself by tendingthe divine riches of his nature, lives but in vain.
For the sake of recapitulation, Lord Krishn named ?action? in
Chapter 2, whereas in this chapter he has told Arjun, and so all of us, toperform the ordained action. Observance of yagya is this action.Whatever else is done besides this is only a part of worldly life. So oneshould, in a spirit of detachment, perform the action of yagya. LordKrishn has then given an account of the characteristic features of yagyaand said that yagya had its origin in Brahma. Mankind is inclined toyagya with sustenance in view. Yagya arises from action and actionfrom the divinely inspired Ved, whereas the visionaries who perceivedthe Vedic precepts were enlightened sages. But these great Souls hadshed their ego. With this attainment, what was left as an outcome wasonly the imperishable God. The Ved is therefore arisen from God andGod is ever existent in yagya. The impious lover of sensual pleasureswho does not follow the way of this prescribed action lives in vain. Thatis to say that yagya is an action in which there is no comfort for thesenses. The injunction demands participation in the act with completesubjugation of the senses. Sinful are they who yearn for sensual
evaØ pravartitaØ cakraØ nÂnuvartayatÍha yaÉ |
aghÂyurindriyÂrÂmo moghaØ pÂrtha sa jÍvati ||16||

Yatharth Geeta 102
comforts. But even after all this, it has not been defined what yagya is.
That brings us to the question whether we have to practice yagya forever,or will there also be an end to it? Yogeshwar Krishn speaks about it:
17. ?But there remains nothing more to do for the man who
rejoices in his Self, finds contentment in his Self, and feels
adequate in his Self.??
The man who is utterly devoted to his embodied Soul, finds
satisfaction in him and feels that he needs nothing more besides him-
has nothing more left to do. After all, the Self was the goal. Once theunmanifest, immortal, indestructible essence of the Soul has beenrealized, there is nothing beyond to seek. A man such as this needsneither action nor worship. Soul and God-Self and the Supreme Spirit-are synonymous. This is what Lord Krishn demonstrates again.
18. ?Such a man has neither anything to gain from action nor
anything to lose from inaction, and he has no interest in any
being or any object.??
Previously there was, but now there is for such a man neither any
profit in doing- nor any loss in the absence of doing. He ceases to have
any selfish relationship with any being. The Self is constant, eternal,unmanifest, changeless, and indestructible. When once this Soul hasbeen known and one is joyous, contented, and absorbed in him, whatelse is there beyond to search for? And what shall we gain by anyfurther seeking? For such a man there is no harm in forsaking action,because he no longer has the mind on which impieties can make animpression. He is not the least concerned with beings of the externalworld or with any of the layer upon layer of inner aspirations. When hehas grasped the very highest, what use has he for anything else?
ÙemlJeelcejeflejsJe  mÙeeoelcele=hle§e  ceeveJe:~
DeelcevÙesJe Ûe mevleg°mlemÙe keâeÙeË ve efJeÅeles~~17~~
vewJe lemÙe ke=âlesveeLeex veeke=âlesvesn keâ§eve~ve ÛeemÙe meJe&Yetles<eg keâef§eoLe&JÙeheeßeÙe:~~18~~
yastvÂtmaratireva syÂdÂtmatçptaïca mÂnavaÉ |
Âtmanyeva ca santuïòastasya kÂryaØ na vidyate ||17||
naiva tasya kçtenÂrtho nÂkçteneha kaïcana |na cÂsya sarvabhöteîu kaïcidarthavyapÂïrayaÉ ||18||

Chapter 3 103
lemceeomeòeâ: meleleb keâeÙeË keâce& meceeÛej~
Demeòeâes ¢eeÛejvkeâce& hejceehveesefle het®<e:~~19~~
keâce&CewJe efn mebefmeefæceeefmLelee pevekeâeoÙe:~ueeskeâme*dd«encesJeeefhe mecheMÙevkeâleg&cen&efme~~20~~19. ?So always do what is right for you to do in the spirit of
selflessness, for in doing his duty the selfless man attains to
God.?
In order to achieve this state, Arjun ought to be disinterested and
do well what is fit for him to do, for a selfless man realizes God only
through selfless action. The action which is worthy of doing is the sameas the ordained action. So to inspire Arjun to ordained action, LordKrishn further adds:
20. ?Since sages such as Janak had also attained to the ultimate
realization by action, and keeping in mind, the preservation
of the (God made) order, it is incumbent upon you to act.??
Janak here does not mean the King of Mithila. ?Janak? is an epithet
of father-the giver of life. Yog, the way by which the individual Soul may
be united with the Supreme Spirit and thus secure absolution, is janak,for it brings out and manifests the embodied Soul. All those who areendowed with yog are sages like Janak. Many such great menpossessing true wisdom have also achieved the final bliss through actionaimed at the ultimate attainment. ?Ultimate? stands for realization of theessence that the Supreme Spirit represents. All great saints, such asJanak, have attained to the state of ultimate realization throughperformance of the action which is yagya. But after attainment they actwith the welfare of the world in view. They work for the betterment ofmankind. So Arjun, too, is worthy of being a true leader of the peopleafter attainment.
Lord Krishn had only sometime back said that there was neither
any gain in action nor any loss in inaction for a great Soul after he hasreached the state of realization. Yet, however, keeping in mind theinterest of the world and the preservation of its order, he continues to
tasmÂdasaktaÉ satataØ kÂryaØ karma samÂcara |
asakto hyÂcarankarma paramÂpnoti pöruîaÉ ||19||
karmaàaiva hi saØsiddhimÂsthitÂ janakÂdayaÉ |lokasaßgrahamevÂpi sanpaïyankartumarhasi ||20||

Yatharth Geeta 104
ÙeÅeoeÛejefle ßes?mleòeosJeslejes peve:~
me ÙelØeceeCeb kegâ®les ueeskeâmleovegJele&les~~21~~ve ces heeLee&efmle keâle&JÙeb ef$e<eg ueeskesâ<eg efkeâÃeve~
veeveJeehleceJeehleJÙeb Jele& SJe Ûe keâce&efCe~~22~~
Ùeefo ¢enb ve JelexÙeb peeleg keâce&CÙeleefvõle:~cece Jelcee&vegJele&vles ceveg<Ùee: heeLe& meJe&Me:~~23~~acquit himself well of his prescribed duty. The reason for this is explained
in the following verse.
21. ?Others emulate the actions of a great man and closely follow
the example set by him.?The man who has known his Self, and who finds joy and
contentment in his embodied Soul, has nothing to gain from action nor
anything to lose from inaction. But, on the other hand, there are instancesof men of true attainment such as Janak and others who wereassiduously engaged in action. In the following verse, Lord Krishn alsounobtrusively compares himself with those great men to suggest: ?I,too, am a great Soul like them.?
22. ?Although, O Parth, there is no task in all the three worlds
which I have to do, and neither is there any worthwhile object
which I have not achieved, I am yet engaged in action.??
Like other sages of attainment, Lord Krishn has also nothing
remaining to do. He said a little earlier that sages have no duty to
perform to other beings. Similarly, in all the three worlds he has nothingto do and there is not even the least desirable object that he does nothave. And yet he is earnestly engaged in action.
23. ?For should I not be diligent in the performance of my task,
O Parth, other men will follow my example in every way.??If he is not careful about the due performance of his assigned
task, other men will also behave like him. Does it mean that even
emulating Lord Krishn (God) may be an error? By his own admission,he will set a bad example if he does not act.
yadyadÂcarati ïreîòhastattadevetaro janaÉ |
sa yatpramÂàaØ kurute lokastadanuvartate ||21||na me pÂrthÂsti kartavyaØ triîu lokeîu kiácana |
nÂnavÂptamavÂptavyaØ varta eva ca karmaài ||22||
yadi hyahaØ na varteyaØ jÂtu karmaàyatandritaÉ |mama vartmÂnuvartante manuîyÂÉ pÂrtha sarvaïaÉ||23

Chapter 3 105
24. ?If I do not perform my action well, the whole world will perish
and I Shall be the cause of varnsankar and so a destroyer of
mankind.??
If he does not acquit himself of his task with caution, not only will
all the worlds stray, but he will also bring about varnsankar and so the
destruction of all mankind.
If the enlightened, accomplished sage is not cautiously engaged
in meditation, society will be corrupted by imitating his example. Thereis no loss to the sage if he does not act because he has realized theultimate goal by successful completion of his act of worship. But that isnot true of others who have perhaps not yet even set foot on the path ofthis spiritual exercise. So great Souls labour for the edification andguidance of those who lag behind. Lord Krishn is doing the same. Theimplication is clear that Lord Krishn, too, was a sage-a true yogi. Heworks just as other sages do for the good of the world.
The mind is very unstable. It desires everything except worshipful
meditation. If sages who have realized God do not act, by their examplepeople behind them will also give up action. Common people will havean excuse for licence if they find that the saint does not meditate,indulges in minor vices, and participates in cheap gossip. Disillusioned,they will withdraw from worship and fall into impiety. That explains whyLord Krishn says that if he does not do his appointed duty, all mankindwill fall from grace and he will be the cause of varnsankar.
According to Arjun, there is a destructive intermingling of disparate
classes when women grow unchaste. In Chapter l, he was troubled bythe fear that there would be varnsankar if women lost their virtue.  ButLord Krishn refuted him and affirmed that there would be varnsankaronly if he was not assiduously engaged in his appointed task. In fact,God himself is the true varn (quality) of Self. Straying from the path thattakes one to the eternal God is, therefore, the aberration called
GlmeerosÙegefjces ueeskeâe ve kegâÙeeË keâce& Ûesonced~
me¿jmÙe Ûe keâlee& mÙeeceghenvÙeeefcecee: Øepee:~~24~~
utsÍdeyurime lokÂ na kuryÂØ karma cedaham |
saßkarasya ca kartÂ syÂmupahanyÂmimÂÉ prajÂÉ||24

Yatharth Geeta 106
varnsankar. If the saint who has perceived God desists from performance
of the worthy task, by following his example others also will lose sightof their duties and become varnsankar, for conflicting properties of natureare then combined in them.
Women?s chastity and purity of stock are features of social order-
a question of rights. It is not that they have no utility for society, but itis also true that moral transgressions of parents do not affect theirchildren?s righteousness and contemplation of God. An individual obtainssalvation by his own deeds. Hanuman, Vyas, Vashisht, Narad, Shukdev,Kabir, and Jesus Christ have all been saints in the true sense, but thesocial respectability of all of them is open to question. A Soul comes toa new body with all the merits he had earned in a previous existence.According to Lord Krishn, the Soul discards an old body and enters intoa new one with the sanskar of all the merits and demerits he had earnedin a previous life through acts of his mind and senses. This sanskar ofa soul has nothing to do with the physical parents of the new body.They make no difference to the development of Souls and there is,thus, no relationship between women?s unchastity and the birth ofvarnsankar. To disintegrate and get scattered among objects of natureinstead of progressing steadily towards the Supreme Spirit is varnsankar.
It is in this sense that a sage is the cause of destruction of mankind
if he does not induce others to act while he is himself earnestly engagedin his prescribed task. Realization of the indestructible God, the rootfrom which everything is born, is life, whereas to be engrossed in theinnumerable objects of nature and stray from the divine path is death.So that sage who does not induce other men to walk along the path ofaction is a destroyer-verily a murderer-of humanity. He is a destroyer ofmankind if he does not check the frittering away of minds and senses,and compel other men to keep to the right path. He is then an embodimentof violence. True nonviolence is cultivating one?s own Self and,simultaneously, also urging others to spiritual discipline and growth.According to the Geeta, physical death is only a change of perishablebodies and there is no violence in this. So Lord Krishn tells Arjun:

Chapter 3 107
meòeâe: keâce&CÙeefJeÉebmees ÙeLee kegâJe&efvle Yeejle~
kegâÙee&efÉÉebmleLeemeòeâef§ekeâer<eg&ueexkeâme*dd«enced~~25~~
ve yegefæYesob peveÙeso%eeveeb keâce&meefÁveeced~
pees<eÙeslmeJe&keâcee&efCe efJeÉevÙegòeâ: meceeÛejved~~26~~25. ?As the ignorant act with a feeling of attachment to their
actions, even so, O Bharat, the wise ought to act for the
presentation of the (divinely) established world-order.??
A wise man, selfless and endowed with spiritual knowledge, acts
in order to inspire the hearts of other men to act for their good just like
any selfish and ignorant man. We may be ignorant even though weknow the way of and practice yagya. Knowledge is direct perception.So long as we are even in the least removed from God and he, thedesired one, from us, ignorance is present. When this darkness prevails,there is attachment to action and its consequences. The selflessmeditate with a devotion which is very much similar to the attachmentwith which the ignorant do their work. There can be no attachment inmen who are unconcerned with doing, but even these sages ought toact for the good of the world and for the strengthening of forces of pietyso that other men take to the right path.
26. ?Rather than confusing and undermining the faith of the
ignorant who are attached to action, the wise man should
prompt them to dwell in God and act well as he himself does.??
Instead of creating confusions in the minds of the ignorant who
are engaged in the performance of the said action, seers who have
directly perceived God should be careful that no act of theirs shouldcause a weakening of other men?s dedication. It is the duty of the sage,who is blessed with sublime knowledge, to inspire others to perform theprescribed action in which he himself is so earnestly engaged.
This is why even in extreme old age my Revered teacher used to
wake up at two in the morning and cough to warn others that he wasawake. And then he would begin to call loudly, ??Get up, you earthly
saktÂÉ karmaàyavidvÂØso yathÂ kurvanti bhÂrata |
kuryÂdvidvÂØstathÂsaktaïcikÍrîurlokasaßgraham ||25||
na buddhibhedaØ janayedajáÂnÂØ karmasaßginÂm |
joîayetsarvakarmÂài vidvÂnyuktaÉ samÂcaran ||26||

Yatharth Geeta 108
men.? When all of us had risen and sat down to meditate, he would
himself lie down for a while. Then he would get up again and say, ?Doyou think I was sleeping? I have really been concentrating on my breath.I lie down because my body is old and sitting is painful for me. But youyoung men have to sit firm and straight and contemplate until yourbreathing is like the continuous, smooth flow of a stream of oil, with nobreak in its current and no external thought to disturb your concentration.It is the worshiper?s duty to be incessantly occupied with the task ofmeditation until then. As for my breath, it is steady and straight like abamboo shoot.? This is why the sage has to act well himself, for withoutthat he cannot induce his disciples to do the same. ?A teacher shouldteach by example rather than precept.??
4
Thus it is the duty of a sage that while he is engaged in action
himself, he should also keep other devotees engaged in meditation. Adevotee should in the same way dedicate himself to worship with sincereadoration, but whether he is a follower of the Way of Knowledge or afaithful doer of selfless action, he must not allow himself to feel arroganton account of his meditation. Lord Krishn now deals with who the doerof action is and what the motives of action are.
27. ?Although all action is caused by the properties of nature,
the man with an egoistic and deluded mind presumes that
he himself is the doer.??
From the beginning to the moment of attainment, all action is
performed because of the properties of nature, but the man whose mind
is clouded with vanity thinks arrogantly that he is the doer. He takes itfor granted. But how can we believe that worship of God, too, is broughtabout by the properties of nature. The necessary evidence is providedby Lord Krishn.
Øeke=âles: ef?eâÙeceeCeeefve iegCew: keâcee&efCe meJe&Me:~
Den¿ejefJecet{elcee keâlee&nefceefle cevÙeles~~27~~
4. The Guru (noble teacher), teaching not only by precept but by the example of his
own life.prakçteÉ kriyamÂàÂni guàaiÉ karmÂài sarvaïaÉ |
ahaßkÂravimöÅhÂtmÂ kartÂhamiti manyate ||27||

Chapter 3 109
leòJeefJeòeg ceneyeenes iegCekeâce&efJeYeeieÙees:~
iegCee iegCes<eg Jele&vle Fefle celJee ve meppeles~~28~~28. ?But the wise man, who is aware of different spheres of the
properties of nature in the form of mind and senses as well
as of their action upon objects, is not a prey to attachment, Othe mighty-armed, because he knows that the mind and sensesdwell upon objects of perception .?
Seers who have perceived the ultimate essence are aware of the
distinction between the properties of nature and action, as also of the
fact that these properties are preoccupied with themselves, and aredisinterested in their action.
?Essence? here means the Supreme Spirit rather than the five (or
twenty-five) elements or primary substances that are countable. In LordKrishn?s words, God is the only element; besides him there is no otherreality. Going across the properties of nature, the sages who dwell inGod-the only reality, are enabled to perceive divisions of action accordingto the properties of nature. If the predominant quality or property isignorance (tamas), it shows itself in the forms of lethargy, sleep, andwantonness-in brief, in a general disinclination to action. If the basicproperty is passion (rajas), the resulting action is characterized by anunwillingness to retreat from worship and a sense of authority. If thedominating property is virtue or quality of goodness (sattwa), the actionsprompted by it bear such traits as concentration of mind, meditativeness,a positive attitude towards experience, continuous thought, andsimplicity. The properties of nature are mutable. So the perceptive sagealone is able to see that the excellence or otherwise of action isdetermined by the constituent properties. These properties effect theirwork through their instruments, the senses and their objects. But theywho have not yet gone beyond these properties, and are still midway,are addicted to whatever they do.
tattvavittu mahÂbÂho guàakarmavibhÂgayoÉ |
guàÂ guàeîu vartanta iti matvÂ na sajjate ||28||

Yatharth Geeta 110
Øeke=âlesieg&Cemeccet{e:  meppevles  iegCekeâce&meg~
leeveke=âlmveefJeoes cevoevke=âlmveefJeVe efJeÛeeueÙesled~~29~~
ceefÙe meJee&efCe keâcee&efCe meVÙemÙeeOÙeelceÛeslemee~
efvejeMeere|vece&cees YetlJee ÙegOÙemJe efJeielepJej:~~30~~29. ?They ought not to undermine the faith of the deluded who
are unaware of the truth, because they are enamoured of the
constituents of matter and so attached to senses and their
functions.?
Men who have an infatuation for nature get addicted to their actions
when they see them gradually evolving towards the level of superior
properties. Wise men who know the truth should not unsettle thesedeceived men who lack in both knowledge and energetic effort. Instead
of disheartening them, the wise should encourage them because they
can reach the ultimate state where action ceases to be only through theperformance of action. After making a careful appraisal of his inborn
capacity and situation, the seeker who has resolved to act by the Way
of Knowledge must deem action as gifted to him by the properties ofnature. If, on the contrary, he presumes that he himself is the doer, it
will make him vain and conceited. Even after progressing on to superior
properties he should not get addicted to them. The seeker, on the otherhand, who has chosen the Way of Selfless Action, has no need toanalyze the nature of action and properties of nature. He has to act only
with a total self-surrender to God. In this case, it is for the God within
(Guru ) to see which properties are making their entry and which are
departing. The seeker on the Way of Selfless Action believes everything
- change in properties as well as his gradual elevation from the lower to
the higher ones - to be a blessing from God. So, although he is constantlyengaged in action, he neither feels the vanity of being the doer nor
becomes attached to what he is doing. Referring to this as well to the
nature of the war at hand, Lord Krishn says:
30. ?So, O Arjun, contemplate the Self, surrender all your action
to me, abandon all desire, pity, and grief, and be ready to
fight.?
prakçterguàasammöÅhÂÉ sajjante guàakarmasu |
tÂnakçtsnavido mandÂnkçtsnavinna vicÂlayet ||29||
mayi sarvÂài karmÂài sannyasyÂdhyÂtmacetasÂ |
nirÂïÍrnirmamo bhötvÂ yudhyasva vigatajvaraÉ ||30||

Chapter 3 111
Ùes ces celeefceob efvelÙecevegefle?efvle ceeveJee:~
ßeæeJevleesÓvemetÙevlees cegÛÙevles lesÓefhe keâce&efYe:~~31~~Arjun is told to fight, restraining his thoughts within his innermost
being, surrendering in a meditative state all his deeds to the God in
Lord Krishn, and in absolute freedom from aspiration, pity, and sorrow.When a man?s thought is absorbed in contemplation, when there is notthe least desire of hope anywhere, when there is no feeling of self-interest behind the act, and when there is no regret over the prospect ofdefeat, what kind of war can a man fight? When thought is withdrawnfrom all sides into the innermost spirit, against whom will he fight? Andwhere? And who is there to fight against? In fact, however, it is onlywhen you enter into the meditative process that the true form of waremerges. It is only then that it is known that the throng of unrighteousimpulses, of desire, wrath, attraction and repulsion, and of desire andhunger, all deviations from piety, which are called kuru, are the greatenemies that create attachment to the world. They obstruct the seekerof truth by launching a vicious assault. To overcome them is real war.To subdue them, to contract oneself within one?s mind, and to achievethe state of steady contemplation is real war. Lord Krishn again stressesthe point.
31. ?Unquestioning and devoted men who always act according
to this precept of mine are liberated from action.?Freed from illusion and possessed of feelings of adoration and
self surrender, men who always act in conformity with Lord Krishn?s
precept that ?one should fight? are also liberated from all action. Thisassurance of Yogeshwar Krishn is not for a Hindu, a Muslim or aChristian, but for all of humanity. His doctrine is that one should makewar. It may appear from this that this teaching is for warmongers.Fortunately, there was the setup of a universal war before Arjun. But,when we are confronted by no such prospect why do we seek resolutionin the Geeta or why do we so adamantly insist that the means of liberationfrom action is available only to fighters of a war? The truth is quite the
ye me matamidaØ nityamanutiîòhanti mÂnavÂÉ |
ïraddhÂvanto'nasöyanto mucyante te'pi karmabhiÉ ||31||

Yatharth Geeta 112
Ùes lJesleoYÙemetÙevlees veevegefle?efvle ces celeced~
meJe&%eeveefJecet{ebmleeefvJeefæ ve°eveÛesleme:~~32~~
meÂMeb  Ûes°les  mJemÙee:  Øeke=âles%ee&veJeeveefhe~Øeke=âefleb Ùeeefvle Yetleeefve efve«en: eEkeâ keâefj<Ùeefle~~33~~contrary. The war, of the Geeta is that of the heart-the innermost Self.
This is the war between matter and spirit, knowledge and ignorance,Dharmkshetr and Kurukshetr. The more we try to check our thought bymeditation, the more the unrighteous impulses emerge as enemies andlaunch a terrible attack. Vanquishing their demoniacal powers andrestraint of thought are at the very centre of this war of the divine song.The one who is rid of illusion and engages in the war with faith, isperfectly liberated from the bondage of action, and of birth and death.But what happens to the one who retreats from this war?
32. ?Know that skeptical men, who do not act in keeping with
this precept of mine because they are devoid of knowledge
and discrimination, are doomed to misery.??
Deluded men, drunk with attachment and lacking in discrimination,
who do not follow the teaching of Lord Krishn, or who, in other words, do
not wage war in a state of meditation in which  there is complete self-surrender as well as freedom from desire, self-interest, and grief, aredeprived of the ultimate bliss. If this is true, why don?t people invariablydo so? Lord Krishn accounts for it thus.
33. ?Since all beings are constrained to act in conformity with
their natural disposition and the wise man also strives
accordingly, of what avail can violence (with nature) be??
All beings are dominated by their governing property and act under
its compulsion. The sage who is blessed with perception also makes
his efforts in accordance with his nature. Ordinary men abide in theiractions and the wise in their Self. Everyone acts according to theinescapable demands of his nature. This is a self-evident andincontrovertible truth. It is for this reason that, according to Lord Krishn,
ye tvetadabhyasöyanto nÂnutiîòhanti me matam |
sarvajáÂnavimöÅhÂØstÂnviddhi naîòÂnacetasaÉ ||32||
sadçïaØ ceîòate svasyÂÉ prakçterjáÂnavÂnapi |prakçtiØ yÂnti bhötÂni nigrahaÉ kiØ kariîyati ||33||

Chapter 3 113
men do not follow his teaching even though they know it. Unable to
overcome desire, self-interest, and sorrow, or, in other words, attachmentand aversion, they fail to act in the prescribed way. Lord Krishn alsopoints out another reason.
34. ?Do not be ruled by attachment and aversion, because both
of them are the great enemies that obstruct you on the way to
good.?
Attraction and repulsion lie within the senses and their pleasures.
One should not be dominated by them because they are formidable
enemies on the way that leads to good and liberation from action; theyravish the seeker?s worshipful attitude. When the enemy is within, whyshould one fight an external war? The enemy is in league with the sensesand their objects-within the mind. So the war of the Geeta is an internalwar. The human heart is the field on which there are marshalled thedivine and devilish impulses - the forces of knowledge and ignorance,the two aspects of illusion. To overcome these negative forces, to destroythe devilish by fostering divine impulses, is real war. But when theunrighteous forces are annihilated, the utility of righteous impulses alsocomes to an end. After the Self is united with God, pious impulses tooare dissolved and merge with him. To overcome nature thus is a warthat can be fought only in a state of contemplation.
Destruction of feelings of attachment and aversion takes time.
Many seekers, therefore, forsake meditation and suddenly take toimitating some accomplished sage. Lord Krishn warns against this.
35. ?Although inferior (in merit), one?s own dharm is the best
and even meeting with death in it brings good, whereas a
dharm other than one?s own, though well observed, generatesonly fear.??
FefvõÙemÙesefvõÙemÙeeLex jeieÉs<eew JÙeJeefmLeleew~
leÙeesve& JeMeceeieÛÚsòeew ¢emÙe heefjheefvLeveew~~34~~
ßesÙeevmJeOeceex efJeiegCe: hejOecee&lmJevegef?leeled~mJeOecex efveOeveb ßesÙe: hejOeceex YeÙeeJen:~~35~~
indriyasyendriyasyÂrthe rÂgadveîau vyavasthitau |
tayorna vaïamÂgacchettau hyasya paripanthinau ||34||
ïreyÂnsvadharmo viguàaÉ paradharmÂtsvanuîòhitÂt |svadharme nidhanaØ ïreyaÉ paradharmo bhayÂvahaÉ||35

Yatharth Geeta 114
There is a seeker who has been engaged in worship for ten years
and there is another who is being initiated into the process only today.
It is but natural that the two cannot be equal. The novice will be destroyedif he imitates the experienced worshiper. It is for this reason that LordKrishn says that, even though deficient in quality, one?s own dharm isbetter than another man?s well-observed dharm. The ability to engagein action that arises from one?s nature is one?s dharm. So dying in theobservance of one?s own dharm is truly fortunate. After the Soul assumesa new body, he will resume his journey from the same point of spiritualattainment at which he had stoped in his last physical life. The Souldoes not die. A change of clothing does not change the mind and itsthoughts. To masquerade as men who have gone ahead of him willcause the seeker only more fear. Fear is a quality of nature, not of God.The pall of nature is thickened when there is imitation.
There is abundance of cheap imitation on the ?spiritual? path. My
Revered teacher once heard a heavenly voice telling him that he shouldgo and live at Ansuiya
5. So he travelled all the way from Jammu to
Chitrakoot and began to live in the dense forests of Ansuiya. Many holymen used to pass by that way. One of them saw that although ParamhansParmanand Ji was living all naked, he was yet held in the highest esteem.So he also at once abandoned the small strip of cloth he had beenusing as a loincloth, gave away his ascetic?s stick and water pot toanother holy man, and went about all nude. When he came back after awhile, he saw that Parmanand Ji was also talking with people and evenabusing them (he had a divine command that he rebuke and evencondemn his disciples if necessary for the sake of their good-that hewatch over the travellers on the spiritual path). In imitation of the greatman, the other holy man also began to speak abusively. But peopleretaliated with angry and unpleasant words, and the poor impostor wasleft wondering why people retorted to him whereas no one spoke a word
5. A holy place in the state of India called Madhya Pradesh, the seat of Swami
Adgadanand?s teacher, the most exalted saint Shree Parmanand Ji. It is so called
because of its association with Ansuiya, wife of the sage Atri, representing the
noblest kind of chastity and wifely devotion.

Chapter 3 115
of protest to the Paramhans Ji.
When he again returned after two years, he saw Parmanand Ji
sitting on a thick and soft mattress and people fanning him. So the
helpless man had a wooden seat brought to the forest, got a mattressspread over it, and hired a couple of men to fan him. Crowds of peoplebegan to flock to him on Mondays when the holy man practiced his?miracles? charging fifty rupees if someone wanted a son and twenty-five rupees for a daughter. But he had to run away within a monthbecause he was exposed as a liar. So imitation does not help when wetread on the spiritual path. The seeker has to practice his own dharm.
What is this one?s own dharm (swadharm)? In Chapter 2, Lord
Krishn had named it and told Arjun that even with his own dharm in viewit was his duty to wage war. There was no more blessed a way for aKshatriy. From the point of view of his innate property, the inherentdharm, Arjun was declared a Kshatriy. Lord Krishn told Arjun that forthe Brahmin, truly devout men possessed with knowledge of the SupremeSpirit, instruction in the Ved was like taking a bather to a mere puddle.But Arjun was urged to learn the Ved and grow into a Brahmin. In otherwords, the inherent dharm is subject to change. However, the reallysignificant point is that the inherent dharm is the most conducive toone?s well-being. But this does not mean that Arjun should imitate aBrahmin, and dress and look like him.
The same path of action has been divided by the sage into four
parts: the lowest, medium, good, and excellent. Lord Krishn has namedthe seekers treading on these paths respectively Shudr, Vaishy, Kshatriy,and Brahmin. Action begins at the level of the lowest, but in the courseof his spiritual quest the same seeker can evolve into a Brahmin. Furtherthan this, when he is united with God, there remains neither Brahmin,nor Kshatriy, nor Vaishy, nor Shudr, but only pure intelligence, the eternaland changeless Supreme Spirit. He then transcends all these classes.Lord Krishn says that he has created the four classes. But, as it waspointed out earlier, the classification was on the basis of action ratherthan according to birth. But what is that action which forms its basis? Is

Yatharth Geeta 116
Depeg&ve GJeeÛe-
DeLe kesâve ØeÙegòeâesÓÙeb heeheb Ûejefle het®<e:~
DeefveÛÚVeefhe Jee<CexÙe yeueeefoJe efveÙeesefpele:~~36~~ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
keâece  S<e  ?eâesOe  S<e  jpeesiegCemecegÆJe:~
ceneMevees ceneheehcee efJeæ?esveefcen JewefjCeced~~37~~it what is usually done in and for the world? Lord Krishn contradicts this
and speaks of the ordained task or action.
As we have seen, this ordained action is the process called yagya,
in which one breath is offered as sacrifice to another and all the sensesare restrained, all of which is in a true sense the practice of yog andmeditation. The special exercise which takes one to the adored God ismeditation. Varn are a division of this act of meditation itself into fourcategories. A man should begin his quest at the level of his naturalability. This is the inherent dharm. If the seeker imitates those who aresuperior to and ahead of him, he will be only burdened with fear. He willnot be destroyed completely, for in the spiritual enterprise the seed isindestructible. But he will be overwhelmed by terror and impoverishedunder the burden of material world. If a student of primary level sits ingraduate classes, he cannot become a graduate although for sure hewill forget even the alphabet. Why, Arjun asks, does man then not actaccording to his inherent dharm?
36. ?Arjun said, ?What, O Varshneya (Krishn), is that which drives
man, forced against his will as it were and with reluctance, to
act impiously?? ??
Why does a man, although like one who is dragged to something
which he despises, act in sinful ways? Why does he not conduct himself
according to the precepts laid down by Lord Krishn? Lord Krishn?s answerto the question is provided in the following verse.
37. ?The Lord said, ?Know that desire arising out of the emotional
property of nature (rajas) and insatiable as fire is the same as
wrath; and learn to recognize it as your most wicked enemyin this world.? ??
arjuna uvÂca-
atha kena prayukto'yaØ pÂpaØ carati pöruîaÉ |
anicchannapi vÂrîàeya balÂdiva niyojitaÉ ||36||ïrÍbhagavanuvÂca-
kÂma eîa krodha eîa rajoguàasamudbhavaÉ |
mahÂïano mahÂpÂpmÂ viddhyenamiha vairiàam ||37||

Chapter 3 117
Oetcesveeef?eÙeles JeefÖÙe&LeeoMeex ceuesve Ûe~
ÙeLeesuyesveeJe=lees ieYe&mleLee lesvesoceeJe=leced~~38~~
DeeJe=leb %eeveceslesve %eeefvevees efvelÙeJewefjCee~keâece¤hesCe keâewvlesÙe og<hetjsCeeveuesve Ûe~~39~~
FefvõÙeeefCe cevees yegefæjmÙeeefOe?evecegÛÙeles~
Slewe|JeceesnÙelÙes<e %eeveceeJe=lÙe osefnveced~~40~~Desire and wrath that spring from the natural property of passion
have an insatiable appetite for sensual pleasure and are the most sinful.
Desire and wrath are the complements of attachment and repugnance.
So Arjun is warned that he must regard them as his most dangerousenemies. And now their deleterious effects are dwelt upon.
38. ?As fire is enveloped by smoke, a mirror clouded with dust,
and a foetus hidden by the womb, even so knowledge is
engulfed by desire.?
Discrimination is obscured by the mantle of desire and wrath. If
we burn damp wood, there is only smoke. There is fire, but it cannot
leap into flame. A dust-covered mirror cannot give a clear image. Just
so, when there exist the perversions known as desire and wrath, the
mind cannot have a clear perception of God.
39. ?And, O son of Kunti, even wise men?s discrimination is
engulfed by desire, insatiable like fire and their perpetual
enemy.?
So far Lord Krishn has named two enemies, desire and wrath, but
in the thirty-ninth verse he mentions only one of them, namely, desire.
In truth, the feeling of anger lies within desire. When a task is successfully
completed anger subsides, but when desire is obstructed angerreappears. So anger resides at the heart of desire. It is important to
know where the enemy hides, for knowing this will facilitate a total
destruction of the enemy. Lord Krishn expresses his view on the problem.
40. ?Since the senses, mind, and intellect are the seats of desire,
it is through them that it deludes a being by clouding-his
faculty of discrimination.?
dhömenÂvriyate vahniryathÂdarïo malena ca |
yatholbenÂvçto garbhastathÂ tenedamÂvçtam ||38||
ÂvçtaØ jáÂnametena jáÂnino nityavairiàÂ |kÂmaröpeàa kaunteya duîpöreàÂnalena ca ||39||
indriyÂài mano buddhirasyÂdhiîòhÂnamucyate |
etairvimohayatyeîa jáÂnamÂvçtya dehinam ||40||

Yatharth Geeta 118
lemceeòJeefceefvõÙeeCÙeeoew efveÙecÙe Yejle<e&Ye~
heehceeveb Øepeefn ¢esveb %eeveefJe%eeveveeMeveced~~41~~
FefvõÙeeefCe hejeCÙeengefjefvõÙesYÙe: hejb ceve:~cevememleg heje yegefæÙeex yegæs: hejlemleg me:~~42~~So we have the answer. Our worst foe dwells within our own
senses, mind, and intellect. It is through them that desire envelops
knowledge and deludes the embodied Soul.
41. ?So, O the best of Bharat (Arjun), first subdue the senses and
kill determinedly this desire, the heinous destroyer of both
spiritual and physical knowledge.??
Above all, Arjun must control the senses because his enemy lies
concealed within them. The enemy is within us and it will be futile to
look for him outside. The war that has to be waged is internal; it has tobe fought within the mind and heart. So Arjun must subdue his sensesand kill this sinful desire which ravages both knowledge of the unmanifestSpirit and knowledge of the physical world. However, he cannot stormthem directly; he has first to lay siege to the stronghold of moralperversions itself by vanquishing the senses.
But to restrain the senses and mind is most difficult. The success
of this endeavour always appears doubtful. Lord Krishn dispels thispessimistic attitude by pointing out the many weapons at his disposalwhich a man can use to fight against the enemy.
42. ?Above senses there is the mind and above mind there is the
intellect, and the one which lies above all of them is the Soul
within, supremely powerful and yet subtle.??
So man is not so helpless after all. He has an armoury of plentiful
arms with which he can wage war with strength and confidence. He can
use his mind against the senses, his intellect against the mind, andabove all these there is his Soul, all powerful and yet unmanifest. ThatSoul is the real ?us,? and so we are strong enough to subdue not onlyour senses, but also our mind and intellect.
tasmÂttvamindriyÂàyÂdau niyamya bharatarîabha |
pÂpmÂnaØ prajahi hyenaØ jáÂnavijáÂnanÂïanam ||41||
indriyÂài parÂàyÂhurindriyebhyaÉ paraØ manaÉ |manasastu parÂ buddhiryo buddheÉ paratastu saÉ ||42||

Chapter 3 119
SJeb yegæs: hejb yegædJee mebmleYÙeelceeveceelcevee~
peefn Me$egb ceneyeenes keâece¤heb ogjemeoced~~43~~43. ?Therefore, O the mighty-armed, knowing the Soul-subtle and
in every respect mighty and meritorious, restrain the mind
with your intellect and kill this desire, your most formidableenemy.??
Possessed of knowledge of the unmanifest and yet mighty Soul
that is beyond intellect, and after a due appraisal of his innate strength
and restraining the mind with his intellect, Arjun must slay desire, hisworst enemy. Arjun has to kill this enemy after a proper scrutiny of hisinherent capacity. Desire is a terrible foe, for it deludes the Soul throughthe senses. So knowing his strength and with confidence in the mightof his Soul, Arjun should kill this desire-his enemy. Of course, thisenemy is internal and the war to be waged against it is also internal- ofthe sphere of the mind and heart.
???????????????
Many loving expositors of the Geeta have given this chapter the
title of ?Karm Yog? (?Way of Action?), but this is not appropriate.Yogeshwar Krishn mentioned action in Chapter 2, and his elaborationof its significance created a reverent attitude towards the subject. Inthe present chapter Lord Krishn has defined action as the conduct ofyagya. It is certain that yagya is the ordained mode. Whatever else isdone by men, besides this, is one form or another of worldly servitude.It will be affirmed in Chapter 4 that conduct of yagya is the action whicheffects freedom from the material world.
The chapter describes the origin of yagya as well as what the
conduct of this discipline has to offer. It then portrays the characteristicfeatures of yagya. The importance of conducting yagya is repeatedlystressed, for this is the ordained action. They who do not practice it arenot only sinful lovers of pleasure, but they also live vainly. Sages ofyore had realized the state of attainment and actionlessness through
evaØ buddheÉ paraØ buddhvÂ sanstabhyÂtmÂnamÂtmanÂ |
jahi ïatruØ mahÂbÂho kÂmaröpaØ durÂsadam ||43||

Yatharth Geeta 120
yagya. They were men who had rejoiced and felt adequate in the Self.
So there was left nothing more for them to do. Yet they continued to beassiduously engaged in their task for the guidance of their less fortunatefellowmen who had lagged behind. Lord Krishn compares himself withthese great Souls. He, too, is left with nothing to do and nothing toachieve, and yet he devotes himself to action for the good of mankind.Thus, he reveals himself as a yogi, an ascetic or saint, engaged inconstant meditation. He is indeed, as we have seen, a Yogeshwar, anadept in yog. Further, in the chapter, Lord Krishn repeatedly cautionssages like himself that they ought not to confuse and undermine thefaith of the initiated seekers, even though they may be engaged inmaterial tasks, because they can achieve the ideal state only throughaction. If they stop acting, they will be destroyed. The right action requiresthe waging of war by concentrating on the Self and the Supreme Spirit.But what is the need of war when the eyes are closed and a man?sthought is centered on contemplation, and when the senses are allconfined within the intellect? According to Lord Krishn, when a seekersets out on the path of worship, desire and anger, and attraction andrepulsion appear as frightening hurdles in his way. To fight and overcomethese negative impulses is war. Entering progressively deeper into thestate of meditation by gradual elimination of the demoniacal, alienimpulses of Kurukshetr is war. So this is a war which rages in the stateof meditation. This, in brief, is Chapter 3 and, as it may be seen fromthe attempted summary, we have not yet been told what precisely actionor yagya is. When we understand the nature of yagya, we will alsocomprehend the nature of action.
This chapter mainly stresses the instructional role of sages, of
great Souls, who have perceived reality. The chapter is thus a directivefor revered teachers. They will lose nothing if they do not undertake anyaction and they will not gain anything for themselves if they do it. Andyet they have to be active for the welfare of mankind. However, nothingof real significance has been said for seekers who wish to realize God.They are not told what they have to do for this. This chapter is, therefore,

Chapter 3 121
not about the Way of Action. The action which has to be undertaken
has not yet been illumined. So far, all that we have been told is that theconduct of yagya is the prescribed action. But, then, we are kept indark about what yagya is. It has to be admitted, though, that the mostdetailed portrayal of war is found only in Chapter 3 in the whole of theGeeta.
Glancing at the Geeta as a whole, it is in Chapter 2 that Lord
Krishn exhorts Arjun to fight because the body is destructible. He shouldfight because the body is ephemeral. This is the only concrete reasonfor fighting given in the Geeta. Later while explaining the Way ofKnowledge, war is said to be the only means for achieving the mostauspicious end. Lord Krishn has told Arjun that the knowledge he hasimparted to him is related to the Way of Knowledge. The knowledge isthat Arjun should fight because it is profitable for him in victory as wellas defeat. Later, in Chapter 4, Lord Krishn will tell Arjun that, restingfirmly in yog he should sever the irresolution in his heart with the swordof discrimination. This sword is the sword of yog. There is no referenceto war at all from Chapter 5 to Chapter 10. In Chapter 11, Lord Krishnonly says that the enemies have already been slain by him, so Arjunhas just to stand as a proxy and earn glory. The enemies have beenkilled even without his killing them; and the power which drives all beingsand objects will also use him as an instrument to effect what he wishes.So Arjun should stand up boldly and kill his enemies who are nothingbut living corpses.
 In Chapter 15, the world will be compared to a mighty-rooted
Peepal tree and Arjun will be directed to seek spiritual perfection bycleaving the tree with the axe of renunciation. There is no mention ofany war in the later chapters, although in Chapter 16 there is an accountof demons who are doomed to hell. The most detailed portrayal of waris thus found in Chapter 3. Verses 30 to 43 are concerned with thesetup of war, its inevitability, the certain destruction of those who refuseto fight, the names of enemies who have to be killed, weighing of one?sstrength, and the determination to slay the enemies. The chapter thus

Yatharth Geeta 122
identifies the enemies and, at the end, also provides the required
encouragement to the seeker to destroy these enemies.
Thus concludes the Third Chapter, in the Upanishad of
Shreemadbhagwadgeeta, on the Knowledge of the Supreme
Spirit, the Science of Yog, and the Dialogue between
Lord Krishn and Arjun, entitled:
?Shatru Vinash-Prerna??
or
??Urging the enemy?s destruction??.
Thus concludes the Most Revered Paramhans Paramanand Ji?s
disciple Swami Adgadanand?s exposition of the Third Chapter of
the Shreemadbhagwadgeeta in ??Yatharth Geeta??, entitled:
?Shatru Vinash-Prerna??.
HARI OM TAT SAT

Chapter 4 123
CHAPTER 4
ELUCIDATION OF
THE DEED OF YAGYA
In Chapter 3, Yogeshwar Krishn had given the assurance that if a
man followed his precept, free from delusion and with sincere devotion,
he would be liberated from the bondage of action. Yog (both of knowledgeand action) has the power to effect liberation from this servitude. Theidea of waging war is embodied in yog. In the present chapter, he pointsout who the author of yog is, as well as the stages by which this discipline
has evolved.
1. ?The Lord said, ?It was I who taught the eternal yog to the
Sun (Vivaswat), who then taught it to Manu, who taught it to
Ikshwaku.? ??
It was he, Lord Krishn says, who at the beginning of devotion
(kalp), imparted the knowledge of eternal yog to the Sun (symbolizing
righteous impulses), from whom it was passed on to Manu (symbolizingmind), son and then to Ikshwaku (symbolizing aspiration). Lord Krishn,as we have seen, was a yogi. So it is a yogi, a sage dwelling in theSupreme Spirit, who initiates the everlasting yog at the beginning or, inother words, at the commencement of worship and transmits it into thelife breath. The Sun represents the way of God-realization. God is the?one light that gives light to all.??
ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
Fceb efJeJemJeles Ùeesieb ØeesòeâJeevenceJÙeÙeced~
efJeJemJeevceveJes Øeen cevegefj#JeekeâJesÓyeÇJeerled~~1~~ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-
imaØ vivasvate yogaØ proktavÂnahamavyayam |
vivasvÂnmanave prÂha manurikîvÂkave'bravÍt ||1||

Yatharth Geeta 124
Yog is everlasting. Lord Krishn has said earlier that the inception,
the seed, of this process is indestructible. If it is but begun, it does not
cease until it has achieved perfection. The body is cured by medicines,
but worship is the remedy for the Soul. The beginning of worship is the
beginning of Self-cure. This act of devotion and meditation is also the
creation of an accomplished sage. To the primitive man lying
unconscious in the night of ignorance, who has not given a thought to
yog, is brought to the perfection of yog when he meets with a sage-just
by looking at the great man, by listening to his voice, by rendering
albeit an inadequate service to him, and by associating with him.
Goswami Tulsidas has also said this: ?Ultimate bliss is granted to the
man who has perceived God as well as to the man who has been noticed
by God.?
Lord Krishn says that at the beginning he taught yog to the Sun.
If a realized sage just casts a glance at a devotee, the refinement of
yog is transmitted into the life-breath of the lucky Soul. All beings that
live are animated by the sun-by God who is subject to himself alone.
Since light is life or breath, it is ordained that the Supreme Spirit can be
attained only by the regulation of life-breath. Transmission of pious
instincts into early man is the imparting of knowledge of yog to the Sun,
after which in due time the seed of this perfection sprouts in the mind.
This is how gods pass on the knowledge to Manu. After the seed has
sprouted in the mind, there will arise a wish for the realization of the
sage?s utterance. If the mind has something in it, there is also the
desire to achieve it. This is Manu?s preaching yog to Ikshwaku. There
will be a longing, or aspiration to do that ordained act which is eternal
and which liberates from the bondage of action. If it is so, there is the
will to act and worship is quickened. Lord Krishn now speaks about the
point to which yog takes us after it has been set in motion.

Chapter 4 125
2. ?Derived from tradition, this yog was known to sages of the
royal stage (rajarshi)1, but at this point, O the destroyer of
foes, it declined and was almost extinct.??
This yog, transmitted by  an accomplished saint into the breath
of the primitive, barbaric man, and thereafter flowing from breath into
the mind, thence to longing (or aspiration), and from that to active practice,thus developing by gradual stages, reaches the royal stage and is thenrevealed to the seeker. Extraordinary powers are generated in worshiperswho have reached this level. At this critical stage, yog almost ceasesto be in this world (body). So the problem is how to carry it beyond thisdividing line. It seems that every seeker is destroyed after reachingthis stage, but according to Lord Krishn it is not so. One who has takenrefuge in him as a loved devotee and dear friend is spared.
3. ?That is this timeless yog which I now impart to you, because
you are my devotee and beloved friend, and because this
yog embodies a supreme mystery.??
Arjun is a Kshatriy worshiper, of the level of rajarshi at which,
lashed by waves of achievement, worshipers are in danger of being
destroyed. It is not that the beneficial nature of yog is cancelled at thisstage, but worshipers usually stumble after arriving at this point. Thateternal and supremely mysterious yog Lord Krishn now imparts to Arjun,because his disciple is in the same way on the brink of destruction.
SJeb hejchejeØeehleefceceb jepe<e&Ùees efJeog:~
me keâeuesvesn cenlee Ùeesiees ve°: hejvlehe~~2~~
me SJeeÙeb ceÙee lesÓÅe Ùeesie: Øeesòeâ: hegjeleve:~YeòeâesÓefme ces meKee Ûesefle jnmÙeb ¢esleogòececed~~3~~
1. Readers need to be warned against a common misunderstanding about the word
rajarshi. It is said that a Kshatriya is elevated to the status of rajarshi by dint of his
pious life and austere devotion just as a Brahmin is raised to the position of a
brahmarshi. But in truth, God has made neither Brahmin nor Kshatriya, and
neither Jew nor Christian. These are only social orders, based on birth oroccupation. So rajarshi is used here to denote one of the four spiritual states
which are distinguished only  by the inner merits of a worshiper irrespective of his
caste or creed. Such an interpretation is correct, for otherwise the yog of Geetahas to be assumed as meant for only members of one caste which is untenable.evaØ paranparÂprÂptamimaØ rÂjarîayo viduÉ |
sa kÂleneha mahatÂ yogo naîòaÉ parantapa ||2||
sa evÂyaØ mayÂ te'dya yogaÉ proktaÉ purÂtanaÉ |bhakto'si me sakhÂ ceti rahasyaØ hyetaduttamam ||3||

Yatharth Geeta 126
Depeg&ve GJeeÛe-
Dehejb YeJelees pevce hejb pevce efJeJemJele:~
keâLecesleefÉpeeveerÙeeb lJeceeoew ØeesòeâJeeefveefle~~4~~And he does this because Arjun is devoted to him, single-mindedly
reliant upon him, and a beloved friend.
When the God we crave for-the accomplished sage-abides in the
Soul and begins to instruct him, only then does real worship begin.Here God and the accomplished sage- teacher, as prompters, aresynonymous. If God descends into the heart at the level at which westand, begins to check and guide, and support in case the worshiperstumbles-only then is the mind fully restrained. Unless God stands byas a charioteer, close to the Soul as a prompter, there cannot be anadequate initiation to his path. Before this the adorer is on trial; he hasnot yet achieved the state of true worship.
My Revered teacher-my God, used to say, ?Ho! I had many a
narrow escape. But God saved me. God taught me this... told me that...??I sometimes asked, ?Maharaj Ji, does God also speak and talk??Thereupon he would say: ?Ho, God talks exactly like you and me, for
hours, and without stopping.? This made me sad and I wondered how
God speaks. This was an amazing revelation to me. After a while MaharajJi would say, ?Why do you worry? God will also speak to you.? Now I
realize that every word of what he said is true. This is the sentiment of
friendship that binds the individual Soul with the Cosmic Spirit. WhenGod begins to resolve doubts like a friend, only then can the worshiper
cross the destructive stage safely.
So far Yogeshwar Krishn has dealt with the inception of yog by a
sage, the obstacles in its way, and the means of overcoming them. ButArjun now asks him:
4. ?Arjun said, ?Since Vivaswat (craving for God) was born in
the distant antiquity and your birth is only recent, how am I
to believe that you had taught yog to him?? ??
Lord Krishn has had a recent birth, in remembered time, whereas
the breath of knowledge he claims to have transmitted to the Sun  belongs
arjuna uvÂca-
aparaØ bhavato janma paraØ janma vivasvataÉ |
kathametadvijÂnÍyÂØ tvamÂdau proktavÂniti ||4||

Chapter 4 127
ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
yentefve ces JÙeleerleeefve pevceeefve leJe Ûeepeg&ve~leevÙenb Jeso meJee&efCe ve lJeb JeslLe hejvlehe~~5~~
DepeesÓefhe meVeJÙeÙeelcee YetleeveeceerÕejesÓefhe meved~
Øeke=âefleb mJeeceefOe?eÙe mecYeJeecÙeelceceeÙeÙee~~6~~to ?the dark backyard and abyss of time.? So how is Arjun to believe
that Lord Krishn is the one who had enunciated yog at the beginning?
Lord Krishn resolves the doubt thus:
5.  ?The Lord said, ?O Arjun, you and I have passed through
innumerable births but, O vanquisher of foes, whereas you
do not have memory of your previous births, I do.? ??
Lord Krishn and Arjun have had numerous births, but the latter
does not remember them. The worshiper does not know. But he who
has beheld his Self knows it and one who has realized the unmanifest
knows it. According to Lord Krishn, his birth is unlike that of others.
Attainment of the Self is distinct from attainment of a body. Lord
Krishn?s manifestation cannot be seen with physical eyes. He is
birthless, hidden, and eternal, and yet he is born with a human body.Therefore, they who preach that death of the physical body bringsliberation offer, but, a false consolation.
A Soul realizes the ultimate essence while he is yet in his assumed
human body. If there is even the slightest flaw, he has to undergoanother birth. Till now Arjun has thought Lord Krishn to be a mortal likehim. That is why he speaks of his recent birth. Is Lord Krishn like otherbodies?
6. ?Although imperishable, birthless, and God of all beings, I
manifest myself subduing the materialistic world of nature
by the mysterious power of atm-maya.??
Lord Krishn is imperishable, birthless, and pervading the breath
of all beings, but he is manifested when he restrains materialistic
attachments by atm-maya. One kind of maya is the moral ignorancethat makes one accept the reality of the material world, and which is
ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-
bahöni me vyatÍtÂni janmÂni tava cÂrjuna |tÂnyahaØ veda sarvÂài na tvaØ vettha parantapa ||5||
ajo'pi sannavyayÂtmÂ bhötÂnÂmÍïvaro'pi san |
prakçtiØ svÂmadhiîòhÂya sambhavÂmyÂtmamÂyayÂ ||6||

Yatharth Geeta 128
Ùeoe Ùeoe efn Oece&mÙe iueeefveYe&Jeefle Yeejle~
DeYÙeglLeeveceOece&mÙe leoelceeveb me=peecÙenced~~7~~
heefj$eeCeeÙe meeOetveeb efJeveeMeeÙe Ûe og<ke=âleeced~Oece&mebmLeeheveeLee&Ùe mecYeJeeefce Ùegies Ùegies~~8~~the cause of rebirth in low and inferior forms. The other maya is that
which Lord Krishn calls yog-maya, of which we are unaware. This is themaya of Self that provides access to the Soul and leads to awarenessof the Supreme Spirit. It is by the operation of this yog-maya that LordKrishn subdues his three-propertied nature and manifests himself.
People usually say that they will have a vision of God when he
manifests himself through an incarnation. According to Lord Krishn,however, there is no such incarnation as may be seen by others. Godis not born in a corporal form. It is only by gradual stages that he controlshis three-propertied nature by the exercise of yog-maya and manifestshimself. But what are the circumstances of such manifestation?
7. ?Whenever, O Bharat, righteousness (dharm) declines and
unrighteousness is rampant, I manifest myself.?Lord Krishn tells the devout Arjun that when hearts fall into inertia
in regard to the Supreme Spirit, the most sublime dharm, and when the
pious are unable to see how to cross safely to the other bank, he beginsto shape his form in order to manifest himself. Such a feeling ofweariness had come to Manu. Goswami Tulsidas has written of hisgrief-laden heart because his life had passed without contemplation ofGod. When despairing tears flow from the eyes of loving worshipersbecause of their overpowering feeling of helplessness at their inabilityto steer across unrighteousness, God begins to mould his form into amanifest shape. But that also implies that God manifests himself toonly loving worshipers and only for their well-being.
God?s incarnation comes about only within the heart of a blessed
worshiper. But what does the manifest God do?
8. ?I manifest myself from age to age to defend the pious, destroy
the wicked, and strengthen dharm.?
yadÂ yadÂ hi dharmasya glÂnirbhavati bhÂrata |
abhyutthÂnamadharmasya tadÂtmÂnaØ sçjÂmyaham ||7||
paritrÂàaya sÂdhönÂØ vinÂïÂya ca duîkçtÂm |dharmasaØsthÂpanÂrthÂya sambhavÂmi yuge yuge ||8||

Chapter 4 129
God manifests himself as a saviour of saintly men. He, the adored,
is the one God after attaining whom there is nothing else to contemplate.
Lord Krishn assumes a manifest form from age to age to destroyimpediments that obstruct the smooth flow of righteous impulses suchas wisdom, renunciation and restraint, as also to annihilate thedemoniacal forces of passion, anger, attachment and repugnance, andto reinforce dharm.
?Age?, as used by Lord Krishn here, does not refer to historical
ages like the Golden Age (Satyug) or the Iron Age (Kaliyug). It ratheralludes to the stages of rise and fall, of the waxing and waning, ofdharm through which human nature has to pass. These are stages ofdharm and the human heart has to progress through them. GoswamiTulsidas has written about it in Ram Charit Manas (7/103)- the devotionalretelling and translation of the Indian epic, Ramayan from Sanskrit intothe language of the people by the sage Tulsidas. The stages of dharmundergo variation in every heart at all times, not because of ignorancebut because of the operation of the divine power of maya. This is whathas been named atm-maya in the sixth verse of the chapter. Inspiredby God, this knowledge is the one which makes the heart a veritabledwelling of God. But how can one know through which Stage one ispassing at the moment? When virtue and moral goodness (sattwa) aloneare active in the heart, when passion and ignorance have subsided,when all fears are stilled, when there is no feeling of repulsion, whenthere is the necessary strength to rest firmly on the signals that arereceived from the desired goal, when the mind is overflowing withhappiness-then alone is one enabled to enter into the Golden Age. Onthe other hand, when the forces of darkness (tamas), combined withpassion and moral blindness (rajas), are sweeping through, when thereare animosities and conflicts all around, the worshiper is passing throughthe Iron Age (Kaliyug). When there is predominance of ignorance andabundance of lethargy, slumber and procrastination, that is the stage ofthe Kaliyug of dharm. The man passing through this stage does not dohis duty even though he knows it. He knows what he is forbidden to do,

Yatharth Geeta 130
and yet he does it. These stages of dharm, of its ascent and descent,
are determined by innate properties. These stages are the four ages
(yug) according to some, the four classes (varn) according to others,
and the four levels of spiritual seeking-excellent, good, medium, andlow-according to yet others. In all the stages God stands by the worshiper.
Nevertheless, there is a plenty of divine favour at the highest stage,
whereas the assistance appears to be meagre at the lower stages.
So Lord Krishn tells Arjun that a worshiper  who is earnestly devoted
to his ultimate goal is a sage, but he can be saved only when the flowof divine impulses such as wisdom, renunciation, and self-restraint,which provide access to the object, is unimpeded. Similarly, doers of
wicked deeds are not undone just by the destruction of their nonexistent
mortal bodies, because they will be reborn with the same wickedimpressions (sanskar) they had earned in the previous life, and do the
same evil which they had done before. So Lord Krishn manifests himself
in all ages to destroy moral perversions and to strengthen dharm.Installation of the one changeless God alone is the final destruction ofevil.
In brief, Lord Krishn has said that he manifests himself again and
again, in all circumstances and categories, to destroy evil and fostergood, and to strengthen faith in the Supreme Spirit. But he does this
only if there is profound regret in the worshiper?s heart. So long as the
grace of the worshiped God is not with us, we cannot even know whetherevil has been destroyed or how much of it still remains. From the
beginning to the moment of final attainment, God stays by the worshiper
at all stages. He manifests himself only in the devotee?s heart. Doesn?teveryone see him when he manifests himself? According to Lord Krishn
it is not so.
9. ?He who has perceived the essence of my radiant incarnations
and works, O Arjun, is never born again after discarding his
body, but dwells in me.??
pevce keâce& Ûe ces efoJÙecesJeb Ùees Jesefòe leòJele:~
lÙekeälJee osnb hegvepe&vce vewefle ceecesefle meesÓpeg&ve~~9~~
janma karma ca me divyamevaØ yo vetti tattvataÉ |
tyaktvÂ dehaØ punarjanma naiti mÂmeti so'rjuna ||9||

Chapter 4 131
God?s incarnation, his gradual manifestation through profound
remorse, and his works-eradication of hindrances which generate evil,
provision of the essentials of Self-realization, and reinstatement ofdharm- are not like the birth and deeds of mortals. These aremetaphysical, not physical. Perceived only as abstractions, God?sincarnation and operations cannot be seen with physical eyes. He cannotbe measured by mind and wisdom. God, so inscrutable and mysterious,is perceptible only to him who has known the reality. He, who has realisedthe quintessence reality of Supreme Sprit by direct perception of divineessence, is truly the knower of the essence. Only he can be asked forproper means. It is he only who can view God?s incarnation and worksand once he has made this direct perception, he is not born again butdwells in Lord Krishn.
When seers alone can see God?s incarnation and works, why do
we have these crowds of hundreds of thousands of men awaiting thebirth of God so that they can see him? Are we all seers? There aremany who masquerade as sages, mainly by dressing as holy men, andwho claim that they are incarnations, and whose agents resort to publicityto prove it. The credulous rush like sheep to have a view of these ?God-men,? but Lord Krishn affirms that only men of perfection can see God.Now, who is this man we call a seer?
Giving his verdict on the real and the false in Chapter 2, Lord
Krishn told Arjun that the unreal has no being and that the real hasnever been nonexistent in all time-past, present and future. This hasbeen the experience of seers rather than of linguists or wealthy men.Now he reiterates that although God manifests himself, only perceiversof essence can see him. He has been united with the ultimate realityand become a seer. We do not become seers by learning to count thefive (or twenty-five) elements. Lord Krishn further says that the Soulalone is the ultimate reality. When the Soul is united with this SupremeSpirit, he too becomes God. So only a man who has realized the Selfcan see and comprehend God?s manifestation. It is evident thereforethat God manifests himself in a worshiper?s heart. At the outset the

Yatharth Geeta 132
JeerlejeieYeÙe?eâesOee cevceÙee ceecegheeefßelee:~
yenJees %eevelehemee hetlee ceÆeJeceeielee:~~10~~worshiper is not able to recognize the power which transmits signals to
him. Who is showing him the way? But after he has perceived the truthof the Supreme Spirit, he begins to see and understand, and thereafterwhen he discards the body he is not reborn.
Lord Krishn has said that his manifestation is internal, obscure,
and luminous, and that the one who sees his radiance becomes onewith him. But instead of this people have made his idols which theyworship; and they imagine that he dwells somewhere in heaven. Butthis is far from the truth. Lord Krishn only means by this that if men do
the ordained task, they will find that they too are radiant. What others
have the potential to be, Lord Krishn already is. He represents the
possibilities of mankind-their future. The day we achieve perfection within
ourselves, we will also be what Lord Krishn is; we will be identical withhim. Incarnation is never external. If a heart is brimming with love and
adoration, there is a possibility of its experiencing the divine incarnation.
All the same, Lord Krishn provides solace to the common people bytelling them that many have realized him by treading on the ordainedpath.
10. ?Free from passion and anger, wholly dedicated to me, finding
shelter in me, and purified by knowledge and penance, many
have realized my being.??
Many who have taken refuge in Lord Krishn- with single-
mindedness and complete detachment, freed equally from passion and
passionlessness, fear and fearlessness, anger and absence of anger,
and purified by knowledge and penance, have attained to his state. It is
not that only now it is so. This canon has always been in operation.Many have attained to his state before. But what is the way? Lord
Krishn shapes himself and appears in a heart that is filled with profound
sorrow at the predominance of unrighteousness. It is people with suchhearts who realize him. What Yogeshwar Krishn had previously called
vÍtarÂgabhayakrodhÂ manmayÂ mÂmupÂïritÂÉ |
bahavo jáÂnatapasÂ pötÂ madbhÂvamÂgatÂÉ ||10||

Chapter 4 133
Ùes ÙeLee ceeb ØeheÅevles leebmleLewJe YepeecÙenced~
cece Jelcee&vegJele&vles ceveg<Ùee: heeLe& meJe&Me:~~11~~perception of reality he now calls knowledge (gyan). God is the ultimate
reality. To perceive him is wisdom. Men with this knowledge therefore
realize him. Here the problem is resolved and Lord Krishn now proceeds
to distinguish worshipers according to their qualities.
11. ?O Parth, as men worship me, even so do I accept them, and
knowing this the wise follow me in every way.??Lord Krishn rewards his worshipers according to the nature of
their devotion; he assists them in the same degree. It is the worshiper?s
dedication that is returned to him as grace. Knowing this secret, therighteous conduct themselves with single-mindedness according to the
way laid down by him. They who are dear to him act according to hisway. They do what he ordains them to do.
God shows his favour by standing with the worshiper as a
charioteer; he begins to walk along with the worshiper and manifest hisglory. This is the form of his loving care. He stands up for the destructionof forces that generate wickedness and to protect righteous impulses
that provide access to reality. Unless the worshiped God acts as the
earnest charioteer who alerts at every step, despite his dedication andclosing his eyes in meditation, and all other endeavours, the worshiper
cannot cope with the adversities of the material world successfully.
How is he to know how much distance he has covered and how muchmore remains to be covered? The adored God stands inseparably with
the Self and guides him: that he is now at this point, that he should do
this, and walk like that. Thus, the gulf of nature is gradually bridgedand, guiding the Soul ahead by gradual steps, God at last enables him
to merge into him. Worship and adoration have to be performed by the
devotee, but the distance on the path which is covered by the devoteeis only by God?s grace. Knowing this, men who are pervaded by divine
sentiment through and through follow Lord Krishn?s precept. But they
do not always do this in the right way.
ye yathÂ mÂØ prapadyante tÂØstathaiva bhajÂmyaham |
mama vartmÂnuvartante manuîyÂÉ pÂrtha sarvaïaÉ ||11||

Yatharth Geeta 134
12. ?Desiring fruits of their action, men worship manifold gods,
for the rewards of action are then earned quickly.?
Desiring accomplishment of the action within this human body,
men take to the worship of many gods. Which action? Lord Krishn has
told Arjun to perform the ordained action, which is performance of yagya,
a way of worship, in which the incoming and outgoing life-breaths are
offered to God as oblation and the outward-looking senses are burnt outin the fire of self-restraint, and whose final outcome is the attainment of
God. The true meaning of action is worship and this is again clarified
later in this chapter. The outcome of this action is oneness with the
eternal God, the supreme goal: the state of total actionlessness. LordKrishn says that men who follow his way, worship gods for the attainment
of actionlessness, that is, they strengthen the divine impulses within.
Lord Krishn said in Chapter 3 that Arjun ought to practice yagya
to foster gods-to strengthen his righteous impulses. He will progressmore and more as these impulses are gradually strengthened and
augmented. Thus, advancing step by step, he will at last achieve theultimate bliss. This is the final stage of the process of spiritualadvancement that has to be gone through from the beginning to the
end. Stressing the point, Lord Krishn says that they who follow him,
even though aspiring for accomplishment of action in their human bodies,tend the righteous impulses which quicken the advent of the state of
actionlessness. Never failing, the process invariably succeeds. What
is the meaning of ?quickly? or ?soon? here? Is it that no sooner do wecommence action that we are rewarded with the final achievement?
According to Lord Krishn, it is decreed that this height can be only
gradually conquered, moving step by step. No one can leap across tothe summit at once and bring about a miracle like the revelations that
teachers of divinity nowadays claim for abstract meditation. Let us now
see how it is.
keâe*d#evle: keâce&Ceeb efmeefæb Ùepevle Fn osJelee:~
ef#eØeb efn ceeveg<es ueeskesâ efmeefæYe&Jeefle keâce&pee~~12~~
kÂßkîantaÉ karmaàÂØ siddhiØ yajanta iha devatÂÉ |
kîipraØ hi mÂnuîe loke siddhirbhavati karmajÂ ||12||

Chapter 4 135
13. ?Although I have created the four classes (varn)-Brahmin,
Kshatriy, Vaishy and Shudr-according to innate properties
and actions, know me the immutable as a non-doer.??
Lord Krishn represents himself as the maker of the four classes.
Does it mean that he has divided men into four rigid categories
determined by birth? The truth is rather that he has divided actions into
four classes on the basis of inherent properties. All the same, as hetells Arjun, he-the imperishable God-is a non-agent and should be known
as such. The innate property (gun) of a being or of a thing is a measure,a yardstick. If the dominant property is that of ignorance or darkness
(tamas), it will result in an irresistible inclination to laziness, excessivesleep, wantonness, aversion to work, and compulsive addiction to evilin spite of the realization that it is evil. How can worship commence insuch a state ?We sit? and worship for two hours and we try to do it withthe utmost earnestness, and yet we fail to secure even ten minutesthat are truly propitious. The body is still and quiet, but the mind whichshould be really quiet soars aloft weaving webs of fancies. Waves uponwaves of speculation toss it. Then why do we sit idly in the name ofmeditation and waste time? The only remedy at this stage is it dedicateourselves to the service of wise men who dwell in the unmanifest andof those who have gone ahead of us on the path. This will subduenegative impressions and strengthen thoughts that are conducive toworship.
Gradually, with the diminishing of forces of darkness and
ignorance, there is the growing sway of the quality of rajas, and a partialawakening of the property of good and moral virtue (sattwa) as well,because of which the worshiper?s ability is elevated to the Vaishy level.Then the same worshiper begins spontaneously to imbibe qualities suchas control of the senses and to accumulate other virtuous impulses.Proceeding further on the path of action, he is endowed with the wealth
ÛeelegJe&CÙeË ceÙee me=°b iegCekeâce&efJeYeeieMe:~
lemÙe keâlee&jceefhe ceeb efJeæ?ekeâlee&jceJÙeÙeced~~13~~
cÂturvaràyaØ mayÂ sçîòaØ guàakarmavibhÂgaïaÉ |
tasya kartÂramapi mÂØ viddhyakartÂramavyayam ||13||

Yatharth Geeta 136
ve ceeb keâcee&efCe efuecheefvle ve ces keâce&Heâues mhe=ne~
Fefle ceeb ÙeesÓefYepeeveeefle keâce&efYeve& me yeOÙeles~~14~~of righteousness. The property of rajas now grows faint and tamas is
dormant. At this stage of development, the worshiper steps on to theKshatriy level. Prowess, the ability to be immersed in action,unwillingness to retreat, mastery over feelings, the capacity to carvehis way through the three properties of nature-are now the inherentfeatures of the worshiper?s disposition. With yet further refinement ofaction, sattwa makes its approach, at which there is the evolution ofvirtues such as control of the mind and senses, concentration,innocence, contemplation and abstract meditation, and faith as well thecapacity to hear the voice of God-all qualities that provide access toHim. With the emergence of these qualities the worshiper comes tobelong to the Brahmin class. This, however, is the lowest stage ofworship at this level. When ultimately the worshiper is united with God,at that point-the highest point-he is neither a Brahmin, nor a Kshatriy,nor a Vaishy, nor a Shudr. But for the spiritual guidance of another, heis the Brahmin only. So worship of God is the only action-the ordainedaction. And it is this one action that is divided into four stages accordingto the motivating properties. The division was made, as we have seen,by a saint ? by a Yogeshwar. A sage dwelling in the unmanifest was themaker of this division. Yet Lord Krishn tells Arjun to regard him, theindestructible and maker of varn, as a non-doer. How can it be so?
14. ??I am unsullied by action because I am not attached to it,
and they who are aware of this are in the like fashion unfettered
by action.??
Lord Krishn is unattached to the fruits of action. He said before
that the deed by which yagya is accomplished is action, and that the
one who tastes the nectar of wisdom generated by yagya merges intothe changeless, eternal God. So the final consequence of action isattainment of the Supreme Spirit himself. And Lord Krishn has overcomeeven the desire for God because he has become identical with Him. So
na mÂØ karmÂài limpanti na me karmaphale spçhÂ |
iti mÂØ yo'bhijÂnÂti karmabhirna sa badhyate ||14||

Chapter 4 137
he is also unmanifest like God. There is now no power beyond for which
he should strive. So he is untouched by action, and they who know himfrom the same level, from the level of God realization, are also notbound by action. Such are the realized sages who have reached thelevel of Lord Krishn?s accomplishment.
15. ?Since it is with this wisdom that men aiming at salvation
from worldly existence have also performed action in earlier
times, you too should follow the example of yourpredecessors.??
In the past, too, men desiring salvation had acted with the same
realization: that the patterns of action are severed when as the final
outcome of his action the doer is one with God, and when he is liberated
from desire even for him. Lord Krishn belongs to this state. So he is
untainted by action and, if we have what he has, we too will be freed
from the bonds of action. Whoever knows what Lord Krishn knows fromhis elevated position will be freed from action. So whatever Lord Krishnmight have been, the unmanifest God or an enlightened sage, his
attainment is within the reach of all of us. It was with this kind of wisdom
that earlier men aspiring for salvation had set upon the path of action. Itis for this reason that Arjun is told to do what his predecessors have
done. This is the only way that leads to the sublime good.
So far Lord Krishn has stressed the performance of action, but he
has not yet explained what this action is. He only mentioned it in Chapter2 and told Arjun to listen to him on selfless action. He described its
special features, one of which is that it gives protection against theterrible fear of birth and death. He then dwelt upon the precautions that
have to be observed in its performance. But despite all this he has not
pointed out what action is. He later added, in Chapter 3, that, whetherone prefers the Way of Knowledge or the Way of Selfless Action, action
is a necessity in each case. One becomes neither wise by renouncing
SJeb %eelJee ke=âleb keâce& hetJezjefhe cegceg#egefYe:~
kegâ® keâcezJe lemceeòJeb hetJez: hetJe&lejb ke=âleced~~15
evaØ jáÂtvÂ kçtaØ karma pörvairapi mumukîubhiÉ |
kuru karmaiva tasmÂttvaØ pörvaiÉ pörvataraØ kçtam ||15

Yatharth Geeta 138
action nor emancipated from action by just not undertaking it. They
who suppress their organs of action with violence are just arrogant
hypocrites. So Arjun should act, restraining his senses with the mind.
Lord Krishn told him to do the ordained action, which is performance ofyagya, to clarify the meaning of action. And now in this chapter he has
told Arjun that even scholars of great erudition are confounded by the
problems of what action is and what actionlessness is. So it is importantthat action and actionlessness are understood well.
16. ?Even wise men are confused about the nature of action and
actionlessness, and so I shall explain the meaning of action
to you well, so that knowing it you may be emancipated from
evil.??
What are action and the state in which there is no action? Even
men of learning are confounded by these questions. So Lord Krishn
tells Arjun that he is going to expound well the meaning of action tohim, so that he can be freed from worldly bondage. He has already saidthat action is something that liberates from the fetters of temporal life.Now, again, he stresses the importance of knowing what it is.
17. ?It is essential to know the nature of action as well as of
actionlessness, and also that of meritorious action, for the
ways of action are (so) inscrutable.?
It is of the utmost importance to know  what action is and what
actionlessness is, as also the action which is free from all doubt and
ignorance and which is undertaken by men of wisdom who haverenounced all worldly desire and attachment. This is imperative becausethe problem of action is a great riddle. Some commentators haveinterpreted the word ??vikarm?? in the text (which has been translated
efkebâ keâce& efkeâcekeâcexefle keâJeÙeesÓhÙe$e ceesefnlee:~
leòes keâce& ØeJe#Ùeeefce Ùep%eelJee cees#ÙemesÓMegYeeled~~16
keâce&Cees ¢eefhe yeesæJÙeb yeesæJÙeb Ûe efJekeâce&Ce:~
Dekeâce&Ce§e yeesæJÙeb ienvee keâce&Cees ieefle:~~17~~
kiØ karma kimakarmeti kavayo'pyatra mohitÂÉ |
tatte karma pravakîyÂmi yajjáÂtvÂ mokîyase'ïubhÂt||16
karmaào hyapi boddhavyaØ boddhavyaØ ca vikarmaàaÉ|
akarmaàaïca boddhavyaØ gahanÂ karmaào gatiÉ ||17||

Chapter 4 139
here as ?meritorious action?) as ?forbidden or prohibited action? and
?diligent action,? etc. But the preposition vi2 prefixed to the root karm
here denotes merit or excellence. The action of men who have attainedto the ultimate bliss is free from all uncertainty and error. For sageswho dwell and find contentment in the Self, and love him and the SupremeSpirit, there is neither any profit in accomplishing action nor any loss inforsaking it. But they yet act for the good of those who are behind them.Such action is pure and it is free from all doubt and ignorance, beingdefined as ?Vikarm?.
We have just seen ?meritorious action.? So we are now left with
action and actionlessness. They are explained in the next verse, and ifwe do not understand the distinction between the two here, we willperhaps never understand it.
18. ?One who can perceive non-action in action and action in
non-action is a wise man and an accomplished doer of perfect
action.?
Action means worship; and the accomplished doer is one who
sees non-action in action, that is, who contemplates God and yet believes
simultaneously that rather than being the doer, he has only been
prompted to action by his inherent properties. Only when this ability to
see non-action has been mastered and the continuity of action isunbroken, should one believe that action is proceeding in the right
direction. The man with this insight is a wise man. Verily a yogi, endowed
with the means by which the individual Soul is united with the SupremeSpirit, and a doer of perfect action. There is not even the slightest error
in his performance of action.
Briefly, then, worship is action. A man should practice it and yet
see non-action in it, that is, realize that he is just an instrument while
keâce&CÙekeâce& Ùe: heMÙesokeâce&efCe Ûe keâce& Ùe:~
me yegefæceevceveg<Ùes<eg me Ùegòeâ: ke=âlmvekeâce&ke=âled~~18
2. Not only here but in the whole of the Geeta, wherever the preposition ??vi?? is
prefixed to a root, it denotes excellence.karmaàyakarma yaÉ païyedakarmaài ca karma yaÉ |
sa buddhimÂnmanuîyeîu sa yuktaÉ kçtsnakarmakçt ||18

Yatharth Geeta 140
the real doer is the only adorable and that he can put efforts only as per
the underlying property. When we know that we are non-doers and there
is yet constant and unimpeded action, only then is made possible the
performance of that action which results in the ultimate good. My nobleteacher, the Revered Maharaj Ji, used to say to us, ?Until God runs into
a charioteer to restrain and guide, real worship does not begin.? Whatever
is done before this stage is no more than a preliminary attempt to beadmitted to the way of action. The whole weight of the yoke rests on
the oxen and yet the ploughman is the one who drives them, and the
ploughing of the field is said to be his accomplishment· Even so althoughall the burden of worship is borne by the worshiper, the real worshiper is
God because he is always by the devotee, urging and guiding him. Until
God delivers his judgement, we cannot even know what has been donethrough us. Are we yet settled in the Supreme Spirit or are we just
roaming about in the wilderness of nature? The worshiper who thus
goes ahead on the spiritual path under God?s guidance, and who acts
with constant belief that he is a non-doer, is truly wise; he knows thereality and he is indeed a yogi. However, is the worshiper to go on
acting forever or will there ever be a point of respite? Yogeshwar Krishn
speaks about this next.
But, before we come to the next verse, let us recall briefly, for the
sake of better understanding, what Lord Krishn has said about action
and yagya, so far. What is usually done in the name of action, he has
said, is not action. Action is a prescribed undertaking-the performance
of yagya. Whatever else besides it is done is not action. According to
Lord Krishn anything apart from this that is done is worldly bondage
rather than action. From what Lord Krishn has spoken about the nature
of yagya, it is evident that it is a particular mode of worship which
guides the devotee to the adored God and effects his dissolution in
Him.
For the performance of this yagya one has to subdue the senses,
control the mind, and augment pious impulses. Concluding this part of
the argument, Lord Krishn said that many yogi depend upon serenity of
breath during silent recitation of the deity?s name by restraining the life-

Chapter 4 141
winds, in which state there is neither internal volition nor coming into
the mind of any desire from the external environment. In such a state of
total restraint of the mind, when even the restrained mind is dissolved,
the worshiper merges into the changeless, eternal God. This is yagya,
the performance of which is action. Therefore, the true meaning of action
is ?worship;? it means divine adoration and practice of yog. And this is
what is treated at length later in the chapter under review. So far only a
distinction has been made between action and non-action, the awareness
of which will guide the worshiper on to the right path and enable him to
tread effectively on it.
A curiosity naturally crops up whether the action is to be performed
always or is to be dropped at any stage. Lord Krishn now speaks about
it:
19. ?Even the learned call that man a sage all of whose actions
are free from desire and will, (both) burnt to ashes by the fire
of knowledge.??
It was said in the last verse that with the acquisition of the capacity
of perceiving non-action in action, the man who is engaged in action
grows into a doer of perfect action in which there is not even the slightestflaw. Now it is added that restraint of desire and will is a victory of themind. So action is something that elevates the mind above desire andwill. Lord Krishn tells Arjun that a well-commenced action graduallybecomes so refined and sublimated that it takes the mind above will aswell as irresolution and then, with the burning out of even the last desirewhich he does not know but which he was previously eager to know,the worshiper is blessed with direct perception of God. Direct knowledgeof God by following the path of action is called knowledge (gyan): thesacred knowledge that enables the Soul to be united with the SupremeSpirit. The fire of this direct perception of God annihilates action forever.What was sought has been achieved. There is nothing beyond it to
ÙemÙe meJex meceejcYee: keâeceme¿uheJeefpe&lee:~
%eeveeefiveoiOekeâcee&Ceb leceeng: heefC[leb yegOee:~~19
yasya sarve samÂrambhÂÉ kÂmasaßkalpavarjitÂÉ |
jáÂnÂgnidagdhakarmÂàaØ tamÂhuÉ paàÅtitaØ budhÂÉ||19

Yatharth Geeta 142
quest for. Who is there beyond God to search for with further endeavour?
So with the attainment of this wisdom, the need for action comes to anend. Rightly have sages called men with such wisdom pandit, men ofprofound erudition. Their learning is perfect. But what does such a saintdo? How does he live? Lord Krishn now illumines his way of life.
20. ??Independent of the world, ever contented, and renouncing
all attachment to action as well as its fruits, such a man is
free from action even while he is engaged in it. ??
Declining to rest upon objects of the world, utterly contented with
dwelling in the eternal God, and discarding not only desire for the fruits
of action but even attachment to God because now he is not removedfrom Him, this sage is a non-doer even while he is diligently employedin the performance of action.
21. ?He who has conquered his mind and senses, and given up
all objects of sensual pleasure, does not partake of sin even
when his body seems to be engaged in action.??
It is only the physical body of the man, who has overcome both
his mind and senses, renounced all objects of worldly enjoyment, and
achieved total freedom from desire, that seems to be engaged in action,whereas, in truth, he does nothing, and that is why he does not incur sin.He is perfect and so he is emancipated from the cycle of birth and death.
22. ?Contented with what comes to him unsought, he who is
indifferent to happiness and sorrow, free from envy, and even-
minded in success and failure, is a man of equanimity,unenslaved by action even when he performs it.?
lÙekeälJee keâce&HeâueemeÁb efvelÙele=hlees efvejeßeÙe:~
keâce&CÙeefYeØeJe=òeesÓefhe vewJe efkeâefÃelkeâjesefle me:~~20~~efvejeMeerÙe&leefÛeòeelcee  lÙeòeâmeJe&heefj«en:~
Meejerjb kesâJeueb keâce& kegâJe&Veehe>esefle efkeâefuye<eced~~21~~
ÙeÂÛÚeueeYemevleg°es ÉvÉeleerlees efJecelmej:~mece: efmeæeJeefmeæew Ûe ke=âlJeeefhe ve efveyeOÙeles~~22~~
tyaktvÂ karmaphalÂsaßgaØ nityatçpto nirÂïrayaÉ |
karmaàyabhipravçtto'pi naiva kiácitkaroti saÉ ||20||nirÂïÍryatacittÂtmÂ tyaktasarvaparigrahaÉ |
ïÂrÍraØ kevalaØ karma kurvannapnoti kilbiîam ||21||
yadçcchÂlÂbhasantuîòo dvandvÂtÍto vimatsaraÉ |samaÉ siddhÂvasiddhau ca kçtvÂpi na nibadhyate ||22||

Chapter 4 143
When a man is contented with whatever comes to him without
being desired or asked for, indifferent to happiness and sorrow, and
love and animosity, free from any negative feeling, and abiding withequanimity in attainment and nonattainment, he is not fettered by actioneven though he appears to be engaged in it. Since the goal he hadaimed at is now achieved and it will not ever desert him, he is freedfrom the terror of defeat. Looking alike at achievement and non-achievement this man acts, but without infatuation. And what he doesis nothing other than yagya, the act of supreme sacrifice. Reiteratingthe concept, Lord Krishn adds:
23. ?When a man is free from attachment, his mind rests firmly
in the knowledge of God, and when his actions are like the
yagya made to God, he is truly emancipated and all his actionscease to be.??
Performance of yagya itself is action and direct perception of
God is knowledge. Acting in the spirit of sacrifice and dwelling in the
knowledge achieved from direct perception of God, all the actions ofthis liberated man who is devoid of attachment and desire undergo aprocess of dissolution. Now his actions are of no consequence to theworshiper, because God, the goal he had striven for, is no longer awayfrom him. Now, what other fruit will grow from a fruit? Therefore, suchliberated men?s need of action for themselves comes to an end. Yetthey act as messiahs, but even while doing this they remain untouchedby what they do. Lord Krishn accounts for this in the following verse:
24. ?Since both the dedication and the oblation itself are God,
and it is the Godlike teacher who offers the oblation to the
fire which is also God, the attainment, too, of the man whosemind is set on Godlike action is God himself.?
ielemeÁmÙe cegòeâmÙe %eeveeJeefmLeleÛesleme:~
Ùe%eeÙeeÛejle: keâce& mece«eb ØeefJeueerÙeles~~23~~
yeÇÿeehe&Ceb yeÇÿe nefJeyeÇ&ÿeeie>ew yeÇÿeCee ngleced~
yeÇÿewJe lesve ievleJÙeb yeÇÿekeâce&meceeefOevee~~24~~
gatasaßgasya muktasya jáÂnÂvasthitacetasaÉ |
yajáÂyÂcarataÉ karma samagraØ pravilÍyate ||23||
brahmÂrpaàaØ brahma havirbrahmÂgnau brahmaàÂ hutam|
brahmaiva tena gantavyaØ brahmakarmasamÂdhinÂ ||24||

Yatharth Geeta 144
The emancipated man?s yagya is God, what he offers as oblation
is God, and the sacred fire to which the sacrifice is made is also God.
That is to say that what is offered by the Godlike worshiper to thesacred fire that is an embodiment of God is also God himself.
That which is worthy of being secured by the man whose actions
have been dissolved and stilled by God?s loving touch is also God. Sothis man does nothing; he only acts for the good of others.
These are attributes of the realized sage who has reached the
stage of final attainment. But what is the nature of yagya that is performedby worshipers who have just set out on the quest? Lord Krishn exhortedArjun in the last chapter to perform the ordained action. Elaborating onwhat this ordained action is, he said that it is performance of yagya(Geeta, 3/9). Anything apart from this that is done by mortals is onlybondage. But action in the true sense provides freedom from fetters ofthe world. So Arjun was told to rid himself of attachment and act in thespirit of renunciation for the accomplishment of yagya. In doing so,however, Yogeshwar Krishn raised a new question: What is yagya andhow to perform it in the due manner? Thereafter he elucidated thecharacteristic features of yagya, its origin, and the profit that ensuesfrom it. So the characteristic features of yagya, were dwelt upon. But itis only now that the meaning of yagya is explained.
25. ?Some yogi perform yagya to foster divine impulses, whereas
some other yogi offer the sacrifice of yagya to (a seer who is)
the fire of God. ??
In the last verse, Lord Krishn portrayed the sacrifice made by
sages who have made their abode in the Supreme Spirit. But he now
depicts the yagya performed by worshipers who wish to be initiated intoyog. These novices undertake sincere performance of yagya to gods tofoster them, that is, they strengthen and augment divine impulses inthe heart. Here it is useful to remember how Brahma had directed mankind
owJecesJeehejs Ùe%eb Ùeesefieve: heÙeg&heemeles~
yeÇÿeeie>eJehejs Ùe%eb Ùe%esvewJeeshepeg£efle~~25~~
daivamevÂpare yajáaØ yoginaÉ paryupÂsate |
brahmÂgnÂvapare yajáaØ yajáenaivopajuhvati ||25||

Chapter 4 145
to foster gods by yagya. The more virtues there are cultivated and
garnered in the heart, the more the worshiper advances towards theultimate excellence until he at last attains it. The novice worshiper?syagya is thus aimed at strengthening the forces of righteousness in hisheart.
A detailed account of the divine treasure of righteousness is given
in the first three verses of Chapter 16. Righteous impulses lie dormantin all of us and it is an important duty to cherish and wake them up.Pointing this out, Yogeshwar Krishn tells Arjun not to grieve becausehe is endowed with these godly merits. With them he will dwell in LordKrishn and attain to his eternal being, because righteousness bringsthe ultimate good. On the contrary, there are the demoniacal, devilishforces which lead the soul to rebirth in low and inferior forms; It is thesenegative impulses that are offered as oblation to fire. This is yagya andalso its inception.
Other yogi perform yagya by offering sacrifice to the accomplished
teacher in his heart-the sacred fire that is an embodiment of God. LordKrishn further adds that in the human body he is the adhiyagya or thatin whom the oblation is consumed. Lord Krishn too was a yogi and anaccomplished teacher. These other yogi offer oblations to the Godliketeacher who also annihilates evils like fire. They perform sacrificesaimed at this accomplished teacher who is also an embodiment ofsacrifice. In brief, they concentrate their minds on the form of theaccomplished teacher, a realized sage.
26. ?While some offer their hearing and other senses as sacrifice
to the fire of self-restraint, others offer speech and other sense
objects to the fire of the senses.??
Yet other yogi offer all their senses of action-ear, eye, skin, tongue,
and nose-to the fire of self-control, that is, they subdue their senses by
withdrawing them from their objects. There is no real fire in this case.
ßees$eeoerveerefvõÙeeCÙevÙes mebÙeceeefie><eg peg£efle~
MeyoeoerefvJe<eÙeevevÙe FefvõÙeeefie><eg peg£efle~~26~~
ïrotrÂdÍnÍndriyÂàyanye saØyamÂgniîu juhvati |
ïabdÂdÍnviîayÂnanya indriyÂgniîu juhvati ||26||

Yatharth Geeta 146
As everything cast into fire is reduced to ashes, even so the fire of
restraint destroys the outward looking senses. There are then yogi whooffer all their senses of perception, sound, touch, form, taste, and smell,to the fire of senses; they sublimate their desires and thus turn theminto effective means for achievement of the supreme goal.
After all, the worshiper has to carry on his task in this world itself,
assaulted all the while by good as well evil utterances of people aroundhim. No sooner than he hears words that arouse passion, however, hesublimates them into the feeling of renunciation and thus burns them inthe fire of the senses. It happened so once with Arjun himself. He wasengaged in contemplation when all of a sudden his ears were thrilled bylilting melody. When he looked up he saw Urvashi
3, the heavenly
courtesan, standing before him. All the other men were enthralled byher sensual charm, but Arjun saw her with filial sentiment as mother.The voluptuous music thus grew faint in his mind and was buried in hissenses.
Here we have the fire of the senses. Just as objects put into fire
are burnt out, sensual forms--sight, taste, smell, touch, and sound-are
bereft of their power to distract the worshiper when they are transformed
and shaped in accordance with the requirements of his goal. Having no
longer any interest in sense-perceptions, the worshiper does not now
assimilate them.
Words like ?other? (apare and anye) in the verses under discussion
represent different states of the same worshiper. They are the varying,
high and low, states of mind of the same worshiper rather than different
forms of yagya.
27. ?Yet other yogi offer the functions of their senses and
operations of their  life-breaths  to  the fire  of yog  (self-
control) kindled by knowledge.??
meJee&CeerefvõÙekeâcee&efCe ØeeCekeâcee&efCe Ûeehejs~
DeelcemebÙeceÙeesieeiveew peg£efle %eeveoerefheles~~27~~
3. One of the celestial maidens, described by the King of Death in the
Kathopanishad as most beautiful to behold.sarvÂàÍndriyakarmÂài prÂàakarmÂài cÂpare |
ÂtmasaØyamayogÂgnau juhvati jáÂnadÍpite ||27||

Chapter 4 147
In the yagya Lord Krishn has so far spoken of, there are a gradual
fostering of pious impulses, restraint of the working of senses, and
parrying off of sensual perceptions through a modification of their intent.
In a still higher state than this, yogi offer as oblation the functions of all
senses and operations of life-breaths to the fire of yog that is lit up by
knowledge of God. When restraint is integrated with the Self and the
operations of breath and senses are stilled, the current which stimulates
passions and the current which propels  one towards God merge into
the Self. The outcome of yagya then emerges as God-realization, the
culmination of this spiritual exercise. When one dwells in the God who
had to be realized, nothing else remains to be achieved. Yogeshwar
Krishn again explains yagya:
28. ?Just as many perform yagya by making material gifts in
service of the world, some other men perform yagya through
physical mortification, some perform the sacrifice of yog,
and yet others who practice severe austerities perform yagya
through the study of scriptures.??
There are many who make sacrifice of wealth. They contribute
riches to the service of saints. Lord Krishn accepts whatever gifts are
offered to him with devotion and he is a benefactor of those who makethese gifts. This is the yagya of wealth or riches. To serve every man,to bring those who have strayed back to the right path, by contributingwealth to the cause is the sacrifice of riches. These sacrifices have thecapability to nullify the natural sanskars. Some men mortify their sensesthrough penances for the observance of their dharm. In other words,their sacrifice, made according to their inherent properties, is penance-humiliation of the body, and it belongs to the stage between the lowestand highest levels of yagya. Wanting in adequate knowledge of thepath that leads to God, the Shudr worshiper who is just setting out onthe way of worship undergoes penance by rendering service, the Vaishy
õJÙeÙe%eemleheesÙe%ee  ÙeesieÙe%eemleLeehejs~
mJeeOÙeeÙe%eeveÙe%ee§e ÙeleÙe: mebefMele?elee:~~28~~
dravyayajáÂstapoyajáÂ yogayajáÂstathÂpare |
svÂdhyÂyajáÂnayajáÂïca yatayaÉ saØïitavratÂÉ ||28||

Yatharth Geeta 148
by acquisition of divine riches, the Kshatriy by demolishing passion
and anger, and the Brahmin with his ability to be united with God. All ofthem have to toil alike. In truth yagya is one and there are only its lowerand higher stages governed by innate properties.
My noble teacher, the Revered Maharaj Ji, used to say, ?To trim
the mind along with the body and senses in keeping with the goal, ispenance.  They tend to digress from the goal but have to be pulled backand applied to it.?
There are many who practice the yagya of yog. Yog is the joining
of the Soul, wandering amidst nature, with God who is beyond nature. Aclear definition of yog is found in the twenty-third verse of Chapter 6.Usually, the meeting of two objects is yog. But is it yog if a pen meetspaper or a dish meets a table. Of course not, because both are made ofthe same five elements: they are one, not two. Nature and the Self aretwo entities, distinct from each other. There is yog when the nature-based Soul meets the identical God, and when nature is dissolved inthe Soul. This is the true yog. So there are many who resort to a strictpractice of restraint because it is conducive to this union. The practicersof the yog of sacrifice (yagya) and they who are given to severeausterities keep in view their own Self and perform the yagya ofknowledge. Here, nonviolent but severe austerities such as restraint,religious observance, the appropriate posture of sitting, serenity ofbreath, withholding of the mind along with the physical organs, retention,meditation and perfect absorption of thought in the Supreme Spirit, areindicated as the eightfold features of yog. There are many who undertakeSelf-study because they aim at Self-knowledge. Reading books is butthe first step to Self-knowledge, for in the true sense it is derived onlyfrom contemplation of the Self which brings about attainment of God,and the final outcome of which is knowledge or intuitive perception.Lord Krishn now points out what is done for this yagya of knowledge orcontemplation of the Self.

Chapter 4 149
29. ?As some offer their exhalation to inhalation, others offer their
inhaled breath to the exhaled breath, while yet others practice
serenity of breath by regulating their incoming and outgoingbreath.?
Meditators on the Self, sacrifice the vital air to apan and similarly
apan to pran. Going even higher than this, other yogi restrain all life-
winds and take refuge in the regulation of breath (pranayam).
That which Lord Krishn calls pran-apan, Mahatma Buddh has
named anapan. This is what he has also described as shwas-prashwas(inhaling and exhaling). Pran is the breath that is inhaled, whereas apanis the breath which moves out. Sages have found by experience thatalong with breath we also imbibe desires from the surroundingenvironment and, similarly, transmit waves of inner pious as well asimpious thoughts with our exhalations. Non-assimilation of any desirefrom an external source is the offering of pran as oblation, whereassuppression of all inner desires is the sacrifice of apan, so that there isgeneration of neither internal desire nor grief because of thoughts of theexternal world. So when both pran and apan are properly balanced,breath is regulated. This is pranayam, the serenity of breath. This is thestate in which the mind is supreme, for restraint of breath is the sameas restraint of mind.
Every accomplished sage has taken up this subject and there is
mention of it in the Ved (Rig, 1.164.45 and Atharv, 9.10.27). This iswhat the Revered Maharaj Ji also used to say. According to him, theone and only name of god is recited at four levels: baikhari, madhyama,pashyanti, and para. Baikhari is that which is manifest and audible. Thename is pronounced in such a way that we as well as other men sittingaround us may hear it. Madhyama is muttering the name at a mediumpitch, so that the worshiper alone, but not even the man sitting beside,may hear it. This articulation is made within the throat. There is thus
Deheeves peg£efle ØeeCeb ØeeCesÓheeveb leLeehejs~
ØeeCeeheeveieleer ®oddOJee ØeeCeeÙeecehejeÙeCee:~~29~~
apÂne juhvati prÂàaØ prÂàe'pÂnaØ tathÂpare |
prÂàÂpÂnagatÍ ruddhvÂ prÂàÂyÂmaparÂyaàÂÉ ||29||

Yatharth Geeta 150
the gradual generation of an unbroken stream of harmony. When worship
is yet more refined, the stage is reached when the worshiper developsthe capacity to visualize the name. After this the name is not recited,because it has now become an integral part of the life-breath. The mindstands as an onlooker and just views what the breath shapes. Whendoes it come in? And when does it go out? And what does it say?Sages of perception tell us that it articulates nothing except the name.Now the worshiper does not even recite the name; he just listens to themelody of the name arising from his breath. He just watches his breathand that is why this stage of breath-control is called pashyanti.
At the stage of pashyanti, the mind is set up as a witness-an
onlooker. But even this is not needed when there is yet further refinement.If the desired name is just imprinted on memory, its melody will beheard spontaneously. There is no need of recitation now, for the namerings in the mind by itself. The worshiper does not recite any longer andneither does he have to compel the mind to hear the name, and yet therecitation goes on. This is the stage of ajapa, of the unrecited. It will bea mistake to think, however, that this stage is reached withoutcommencing the process of recitation. If it has not been initiated; therewill be nothing like ajapa. Ajapa means that recitation which does notdesert us even though we do not recite. If only memory of the name isfirmly setup in the mind, recitation begins to flow through it like a perennialstream. This spontaneous recitation is named ajapa and this is therecitation by transcendental articulation (paravani). It takes one to Godwho is the essence beyond nature. There is no variation in speech afterthis, for after providing a view of God it is dissolved in him. This is whyit is called para.
In the quoted verse, Lord Krishn has only told Arjun to watch his
breath, whereas later he himself will stress the importance of intoningOM. Gautam Buddh too has dwelt upon inhalations and exhalations in?Anapan Sati??. After all, what does the Yogeshwar really intend to say?In truth, beginning with baikhari, then progressing on to madhyama,and going even further than this, at the stage of pashyanti, one attains

Chapter 4 151
control over breath. At this stage recitation is integrated with breath.
And what is there to recite now when the worshiper has just to watchhis breath? It is for this reason that Lord Krishn speaks only of pran-apan rather than telling Arjun to ?recite the name.? This is so becausethere is no need to tell him this. If he says it, the worshiper will goastray and begin to grope about in the dark alleys of neither levels.Mahatma Buddh, my noble Godlike teacher, and all those who havetrodden this path say the same thing. Baikhari and madhyama are theportals by which we enter into the sphere of recitation. It is pashyantithat provides access into the name. The name begins to flow in anunbroken stream in para, and the internal, spontaneous, intoning of thename never abandons the worshiper after this.
The mind is linked with breath. That is the state of victory of the
mind when the eye is set on the breath, when the name is incorporatedinto breath, and no desire of the external world can enter into theworshiper. With this the final outcome of yagya emerges.
30. ?Yet others who subsist on strictly regulated breath and offer
their breath to breath, and life to life, are all knowers of yagya,
and the sins of all who have known yagya are destroyed.??
They who partake of restricted food offer as oblation their breath
to breath-life to life. My noble teacher, the Revered Maharaj Ji, used to
say that the food, posture of sitting, and sleep of a yogi should be
steady. Regulation of food and pleasure is a necessity. Many yogi who
observe such discipline renounce their breath to breath, concentrating
on inhalations and paying no heed to exhalations. With each incoming
breath they hear OM. Thus, men whose sins have been destroyed by
yagya are men of true knowledge. Lord Krishn now speaks of the
outcome of yagya.
Dehejs efveÙeleeneje: ØeeCeevØeeCes<eg peg£efle~
meJexÓhÙesles Ùe%eefJeoes Ùe%e#eefhelekeâuce<ee:~~30~~
apare niyatÂhÂrÂÉ prÂàÂnprÂàeîu juhvati |
sarve'pyete yajáavido yajáakîapitakalmaîÂÉ ||30||

Yatharth Geeta 152
31. ?O the best of Kuru, the yogi who have tasted the nectar
flowing from yagya attain to the eternal supreme God, but
how can the next life of people bereft of yagya be happy when
even their life in this world is miserable??
What yagya generates-what results from it, is nectar the substance
of immortality. A direct experience of this is wisdom. The one who
feeds on it becomes one with the eternal God. So yagya is something
which with its completion unites the worshiper with God. What will be
the consequence if yagya is not performed? According to Lord Krishn,
how can the next world bring happiness to people bereft of yagya when
even the mortal, human birth is beyond their reach? It is their inevitable
lot to be born in lower forms and nothing better than them. So the
observance of yagya is a necessity.
32. ?Many such yagya are laid down by the Ved but they all
germinate and grow from the ordained action, and performing
their various steps you will be free from worldly bondage.??
There are several types of yagya elaborated by the Ved-God?s
own words. After realization, God assumes the body of accomplished
sages. The minds of men who have become one with God are then
mere instruments. It is God who speaks through them. So it is in his
voice that these yagya have been enunciated.
Lord Krishn tells Arjun that he should know that all these yagya
have arisen from action. This is what he has said before, too. (Geeta,
3/14) He has just pointed out that all those, whose sins have beenwiped out by yagya, are the real knowers of yagya. And now he tellsArjun that he will be freed from the bonds of the world if he knows thatyagya arises from action. Here the Yogeshwar has clearly stated the
Ùe%eefMe°ece=leYegpees Ùeeefvle yeÇÿe meveeleveced~
veeÙeb ueeskeâesÓmlÙeÙe%emÙe kegâleesÓvÙe: kegâ®meòece~~31~~SJeb yengefJeOee Ùe%ee efJelelee yeÇÿeCees cegKes~
keâce&peeefvJeefæ leevmeJee&vesJeb %eelJee efJecees#Ùemes~~32~~
yajáaïiîòÂmçtabhujo yÂnti brahma sanÂtanam |
nÂyaØ loko'styayajáasya kuto'nyaÉ kurusattama ||31||evaØ bahuvidhÂ yajáÂ vitatÂ brahmaào mukhe |
karmajÂnviddhi tÂnsarvÂnevaØ jáÂtvÂ vimokîyase ||32

Chapter 4 153
meaning of action. That conduct is action by which yagya is
accomplished.
Now, there is no harm in engaging ourselves in trade, service,
and politics if in doing them we can earn divine riches, contemplate anaccomplished teacher, restrain the senses, offer the oblation of outgoingbreath to the incoming breath, sacrifice inhalations to exhalations, andregulate the vital winds of life. But we know that it is not so. Yagya isthe only exercise that transports one to God the very moment it iscomplete. Do any other work you like if it takes you to God in the sameway.
In fact, all these forms of yagya are but internal processes of
contemplation-forms of worship which make God manifest and known.Yagya is the special ordained mode that helps the worshiper to traversethe path that leads to God. That by which this yagya is accomplished,regulation and serenity of breath, is action. The true meaning of ?action?is therefore ?worship?.
It is usually said that whatever is done in the world is action.
Work without desire or selfish interest is the Way of Selfless Action.Some feel that it is action if they sell imported fabric for greater profit.They feel they are men of action. For others, dealing in indigenousgoods to serve the country is the Way of Selfless Action. If one actswith dedication or trades without thinking of profit and loss, that is theWay of Selfless Action. Fighting a war or contesting an election withoutthought of winning and losing makes one a doer of selfless action. Butthese deeds cannot bring salvation. Lord Krishn has said categoricallythat the ordained action is only one, and he has told Arjun to do it. Theperformance of yagya is action. And yagya is sacrifice of breath, restraintof the senses, contemplation of the Supreme Spirit-the accomplishedteacher-who symbolizes yagya, and finally, regulation and serenity ofbreath. This is the stage of mind?s conquest. The world is nothing butan extension of mind. In Lord Krishn?s words the transient world isconquered right here, ?upon this bank and shoal of time,? by men whohave achieved even-mindedness. But what is the relation between such

Yatharth Geeta 154
equanimity of mind and subjugation of the world? If the world itself is
conquered, where does one halt? According to Lord Krishn God isflawless and impartial, and unaffected by passion; and so is the mindof the man who has secured knowledge. So the two become one.
In brief, the world is an expanded form of the mind. So the mutable
world is the object that has to be offered as a sacrifice. When the mindis perfectly controlled, there is also perfect control over the world. Theoutcome of yagya appears clearly when the mind is fully restrained.The nectar of knowledge that is generated by yagya takes the man whohas tasted it to the immortal God. This is witnessed by all sages whohave realized God. It is not that worshipers of different schools performyagya in different ways. The different forms cited in the Geeta are onlythe higher and lower states of the same worship. That by which thisyagya begins to be done is action. There is not a single verse in theentire Geeta which defends or approves of worldly enterprise as a wayto the realization of God.
Usually, for the performance of yagya people build an altar, light
a fire on it and, intoning swaha, cast barley grains and oil seeds into thesacred fire. This is not appropriate. Wealth yagya is something differentdescribed by Lord Krishn time to time. Killing of animals, object burningetc. has no relation at all with the performance of yagya.
33. ?Sacrifice through wisdom is, O Parantap, in every way
superior to sacrifices made with material objects, because
(O Parth) all action ceases in knowledge, their culmination.??
The yagya of wisdom, made by means of austerity, continence,
faith, and knowledge, which brings about a direct perception of God, is
the most propitious. All actions are fully dissolved in this knowledge.Knowledge is thus the crowning point of yagya. Thenceforth there isneither any profit in the doing of action nor any loss in abstaining fromit.
ßesÙeevõJÙeceÙeeÅe%eep%eeveÙe%e: hejvlehe~
meJeË keâcee&efKeueb heeLe& %eeves heefjmeceehÙeles~~33~~
ïreyÂndravyamayÂdyajáÂjjáÂnayajáaÉ parantapa |
sarvaØ karmÂkhilaØ pÂrtha jáÂne parisamÂpyate ||33||

Chapter 4 155
In the same way there are yagya that are performed with material-
objects, but they are insignificant in comparison with the yagya of
knowledge which enables a man to have direct perception of God. Evenif we sacrifice millions, build hundreds of altars for the sacred fire,contribute money to good causes, and invest money in the service ofsages and saints, this yagya is much inferior to the sacrifice ofknowledge. Lord Krishn has just told us, that real yagya is restraint ofthe vital winds of life, subduing of the senses, and control of the mind.From where can we learn its mode? From temples, mosques orchurches? Shall we get it by going on pilgrimage to holy places or bydipping ourselves in sacred rivers? Lord Krishn?s pronouncement isthat it can be had from only one source, namely, the sage who hasknown the reality.
34. ?Obtain that knowledge (from sages) through reverence,
inquiry and innocent solicitation, and the sages who are aware
of reality will initiate you into it.??
So Arjun is advised to approach seers with reverence, self-
surrender, and humility, to be instructed in true knowledge through
devoted service and guileless curiosity. These seers will enlighten himon it. The ability to acquire this knowledge comes only with a whollydedicated service. They are seers who enable us to have directperception of God. They know the mode of yagya and they will teach itto Arjun. Had the yagya been something else, what is the need of aseer?
Isn?t Arjun standing directly before the Lord? Then why does Lord
Krishn ask him to go to a seer? In truth, the meaning of Lord Krishn whowas a yogi-indeed a Yogeshwar-is that today the worshiper is with him,but he may be confused in future when he is no longer present to guidehim. ?Ah me!,?? Arjun will say, ?Lord Krishn has gone and I don?t know towhom to turn now for guidance.?? That is why Lord Krishn tells Arjun
leefÉefæ ØeefCeheelesve heefjØeMvesve mesJeÙee~
Gheos#Ùeefvle les %eeveb %eeefvevemleòJeoefMe&ve:~~34~~
tadviddhi praàipÂtena paripraïnena sevayÂ |
upadekîyanti te jáÂnaØ jáÂninastattvadarïinaÉ ||34||

Yatharth Geeta 156
Ùep%eelJee ve hegveceexncesJeb ÙeemÙeefme heeC[Je~
Ùesve YetleevÙeMes<esCe õ#ÙemÙeelcevÙeLees ceefÙe~~35~~
Deefhe Ûesoefme heehesYÙe: meJexYÙe: heeheke=âòece:~meJeË %eevehueJesvewJe Je=efpeveb mevleefj<Ùeefme~~36~~
ÙeLewOeebefme meefceæesÓefiveYe&mcemeelkegâ®lesÓpeg&ve~
%eeveeefive: meJe&keâcee&efCe Yemcemeelkegâ®les leLee~~37~~categorically that he should approach seers who will instruct him in true
knowledge.
35. ?Knowing which, O son of Pandu, you will never again be a
prey like this to attachment, and equipped with this
knowledge you will see all beings within yourself and thenwithin me.??
After acquiring this knowledge from sages Arjun will be rid of all
attachment. Possessed of this knowledge he will perceive all beings in
his Self, that is, he will see the extension of the same Self everywhere,and only then can he become one with God. Thus, the means of attainingto that God is the sage who has perceived reality. According to LordKrishn, a seeker must go only to the knower of essence for resolvingdoubts about the spiritual wisdom, dharm and eternal truth.
36. ?Even if you are the most heinous sinner, the ark of knowledge
will carry you safely across all evils.?? We should not make the error of concluding from this that we will
know salvation even with committing more and yet more sin. Lord Krishn
rather intends to say by this that we should not be under the mistakenimpression that we are such great sinners that there cannot be salvationfor us. So this is Lord Krishn?s message of hope and courage to Arjunand to everybody: that despite being the doer of sins greater than thesins of all sinners he will sail across sins successfully, by the ark ofknowledge acquired from seers. Thus-
37. ?As blazing fire turns fuel to ashes, so verily O Arjun, the fire
of knowledge reduces all action to ashes.??
yajjáÂtvÂ na punarmohamevaØ yÂsyasi pÂàÅava |
yena bhötÂnyaïeîeàa drakîyasyÂtmanyatho mayi ||35||
api cedasi pÂpebhyaÉ sarvebhyaÉ pÂpakçttamaÉ |sarvaØ jáÂnaplavenaiva vçjinaØ santariîyasi ||36||
yathaidhÂØsi samiddho'gnirbhasmasÂtkurute'rjuna |
jáÂnÂgniÉ sarvakarmÂài bhasmasÂtkurute tathÂ ||37||

Chapter 4 157
Here we have a portrayal, not of an introduction to knowledge
through which one approaches yagya, but of the culmination of
knowledge or perception of God, in which there is first the destructionof all unrighteous inclinations and in which then even the act of meditationis dissolved. The one who had to be attained to has been attained. Nowwho is there to look for by further meditation? The sage with the wisdomthat arises from perception of God brings his actions to an end. Butwhere does this perception of God occur? Is it an external or internalphenomenon?
38. ?Doubtlessly nothing in the world is more purifying than this
knowledge and your heart will realize it spontaneously when
you have attained to perfection on the Way of Action.?
Nothing in this world purifies as this knowledge does. And this
knowledge will be manifest to the doer alone, not to anyone else, when
his practice of yog has reached maturity, not at its inception, not in themiddle, not externally but within his heart-within his Self. What is therequired ability for this knowledge? In the words of the Yogeshwar,-
39. ??The worshiper of true faith who has subdued his senses
attains to this knowledge and at the very moment (of
attainment) he is rewarded with the benediction of supremepeace.?
For realization of God one needs to possess faith, determination,
and restraint of the senses. If there is no intensely felt curiosity for the
knowledge of God, even taking refuge in a seer will not bring it.
Also, mere faith is not enough. The worshiper?s effort may be
feeble. Therefore, the determination to proceed resolutely along the
ve  efn  %eevesve  meÂMeb  heefJe$eefcen  efJeÅeles~
lelmJeÙeb Ùeesiemebefmeæ: keâeuesveelceefve efJevoefle~~38~~ßeæeJeeBuueYeles %eeveb lelhej: mebÙelesefvõÙe:~
%eeveb ueyOJee hejeb MeeefvleceefÛejsCeeefOeieÛÚefle~~39~~
na hi jáÂnena sadçiïaØ pavitramiha vidyate |
tatsvayaØ yogasaØsiddhaÉ kÂlenÂtmani vindati ||38||ïraddhÂvÂnllabhate jáÂnaØ tatparaÉ saØyatendriyaÉ |
jáÂnaØ labdhvÂ parÂØ ïÂntimacireàÂdhigacchati ||39||

Yatharth Geeta 158
prescribed way is a necessity. Along with this it is also necessary to
restrain the senses. Realization of the Supreme God will not comeeasily to one who is not free from desire. So only a man who has faith,enthusiasm for action, and restraint of the senses can have thisknowledge. And the very moment this knowledge dawns upon him, heis blessed with the ultimate peace, because after this there is left nothingmore to strive for. After this he will never know anything other thanpeace. But,
40. ?For a skeptic, bereft of faith and knowledge, who strays from
the path of righteousness, there is happiness neither in this
world nor in the next; he loses both the worlds.?
For the man who is ignorant of the way of yagya- for the doubting
man who is of devoid of faith and who strays from the path of good,
there is no happiness, no next life in human form, and no God. So ifthere are any doubts in the worshiper, he should go to a seer and resolvethem, or else he will never know the reality. So who is blessed withknowledge?
41. ?O Dhananjay, action cannot bind the man who relies on God
and who has surrendered all his actions to him by the practice
of karm-yog and all whose doubts have been put to rest byknowledge.??
Action cannot enslave the man whose deeds are dissolved in
God by the practice of yog, whose doubts have been resolved by
perception, and who is united with God. Action will be brought to an endonly by yog. Only knowledge will destroy doubts. So Lord Krishn finallysays:
De%e§eeßeöOeeve§e mebMeÙeelcee efJeveMÙeefle~
veeÙeb ueeskeâesÓefmle ve hejes ve megKeb mebMeÙeelceve:~~40~~ÙeesiemeVÙemlekeâcee&Ceb %eevemeef_ÚVemebMeÙeced~
DeelceJevleb ve keâcee&efCe efveyeOveefvle OeveÀeÙe~~41~~
ajáasÉcÂïraddadhÂnasÉca sanïayÂtmÂ vinaïyati |
nÂyaØ loko'sti na paro na sukhaØ sanïayÂtmanaÉ||40yogasannyastakarmÂàaØ jáÂnasaáchinnasaØïayam |
ÂtmavantaØ na karmÂài nibadhnanti dhanaájaya||41||

Chapter 4 159
42. ?So, O Bharat, dwell in yog and stand up to cut down this
irresolution that has entered into your heart because of
ignorance with the steel of knowledge.??
Arjun has to fight. But the enemy-irresolution-is within his own
heart, not outside. When we proceed on the way of devotion and
contemplation, it is but natural that feelings of doubt and passion will
arise as obstacles before us. These enemies launch a fearful assault.
To fight them and overcome them, through the destruction ofuncertainties by the practice of the ordained yagya, is the war that
Arjun has to wage, and the result of this war for him will be absolute
peace and victory after which there is no possibility of defeat.
???????????????
At the outset of the chapter, Lord Krishn says that he had imparted
knowledge of yog to Vivaswat in the beginning. Vivaswat taught it toManu and Manu to Ikshwaku, and thus the knowledge evolved to the
stage of rajas. The teacher who had imparted this knowledge was Lord
Krishn or, in other words, one who is birthless and unmanifest. A realizedsage too is birthless and unmanifest. His body is but an abode in which
he dwells. It is God himself who speaks through his voice. It is by
some such sage that yog is imparted. Even a glance of such a sageirradiates one?s life-breath with the effulgence of Self-realization.
Possessing the light it sends forth, the sun symbolizes the ever-luminous
God who resides in, as well as, expresses himself through breath.??Imparting the knowledge of yagya to the Sun?? stands for awakening of
the divine life that lies dormant and unperceived in every human heart.
Transmitted to breath this light is hallowed into a sacred discipline. Indue course, it enters the mind as a resolve. Realization of the significance
of Lord Krishn?s utterance to Vivaswat gives rise to a hankering for
achieving it and yog is then transformed into action.
lemceeo%eevemecYetleb ùlmLeb %eeveeefmeveelceve:~
efÚòJewveb mebMeÙeb Ùeesieceeefle?esefòe? Yeejle~~42~~
tasmÂdajáÂnasambhötaØ hçtsthaØ jáÂnÂsinÂtmanaÉ |
chittvainaØ saØïayaØ yogamÂtiîòhottiîòha bhÂrata||42

Yatharth Geeta 160
The point in hand needs further elaboration. Vivaswat, Manu, and
Ikshwaku are symbolic primogenitors of mankind. Vivaswat represents
the unenlightened primitive man without spiritual awakening. It is a sagewho sows the seeds of devotion in this man. There then comes intobeing a desire for God that arises in the mind which is Manu inmicrocosm. The mind transforms the aspiration into an acute cravingwhich is embodied as Ikshwaku, and the process of changing it intopractice is speeded up. After having gone through the first two stages,when the worshiper is endowed with divine impulses, the yearning forGod enters upon the third stage when yog becomes known and beginsto manifest its glory. This is indeed a stage fraught with risk, for yog isnow on the brink of destruction. But they who are loved devotees and,dear friends are provided with succour by sages like Lord Krishn.
When Arjun refers to his recent birth, Lord Krishn points out that,
although unmanifest, imperishable, birthless, and pervading all beings,he yet manifests himself by atm-maya and by subduing by his yog hisnature with its three properties. What then does he do after manifestinghimself? Since the beginning, he has undergone one incarnation afteranother to protect that which is fit for accomplishment, as well as todestroy forces which give rise to evils and to strengthen the Godlikedharm. His birth and acts are of a metaphysical nature and only a seercan perceive them. The state of Kaliyug (predominance of forces ofdarkness) brings about the advent of God, but only if there is earnestdevotion. But novice worshipers are unable to know whether God isspeaking to them or whether the signs coming to them are devoid ofany purpose. Whose voice do we hear from the heavens? My nobleteacher used to tell us that when God showers his grace and when heturns within the Self into a charioteer, he speaks and provides supportfrom every column, every leaf, verily from emptiness itself, and fromevery corner. When with constant refinement there is awareness of theessence that is God, only then, by feeling his presence as if by touch,does the worshiper know the reality. So Lord Krishn has told Arjun that

Chapter 4 161
his manifest form can be viewed only by seers, after which they are
released from birth and death.
He has further explained the mode of God?s manifestation: of
how it is an event that occurs within the heart of a devoted yogi andcertainly never externally. Lord Krishn has said that action does notbind him, and just so they who have attained to the same state are notbound by action. It was with realization of this truth that earlier mendesiring salvation set out on the path of action to reach that state, andthe man who has known what Lord Krishn knows from his elevatedposition, and Arjun, too, desiring salvation, will be what Lord Krishn is.This attainment is assured if yagya is performed. Lord Krishn has thentold us the nature of this yagya and that the final outcome of this exerciseis realization of the highest reality-of the ultimate tranquility. But whereto go in order to know the way of knowledge? Lord Krishn has advisedArjun to approach sages and win them over with reverence, humbleinquiry, and guileless solicitation. He has also said unambiguously thatthis knowledge he can acquire only by his own action rather than throughthe conduct or action of others. Also, it will come to him when his yogis in an accomplished stage rather than at the outset. Perception ofknowledge will be within the sphere of heart, not outside. And it comesonly to those who are dedicated, determined, in control of their senses,and free from all doubt. So finally, Arjun is advised to sever theirresolution in his heart with the sword of renunciation. Thus, war iswithin the heart. The war of the Geeta is quite unconcerned with anyexternal conflict.
In this chapter, Lord Krishn has thus mainly elaborated and
explained the nature and form of yagya, and added that the deed ofaccomplishing it is action.

Yatharth Geeta 162
Thus concludes the Fourth Chapter, in the Upanishad of the
Shreemadbhagwadgeeta, on the Knowledge of the Supreme
Spirit, the Science of Yog, and the Dialogue between
Lord Krishn and Arjun, entitled:
?Yagya Karm-Spashtikaran?
or
??Elucidation of the Deed of Yagya??.
Thus concludes the Most Revered Paramhans Paramanand Ji?s
disciple Swami Adgadanand?s exposition of the Fourth Chapter
of the Shreemadbhagwadgeeta in ??Yatharth Geeta??, entitled:
?Yagya Karm-Spashtikaran?.
HARI OM TAT SAT

Chapter 5 163
CHAPTER 5
THE SUPREME GOD :
ENJOYER OF YAGYA
In Chapter 3, Arjun said, ?Lord! Why do you cast me into dreadful
acts when you believe that the Way of Knowledge is superior?? He
found the Way of Knowledge easier to practice, for this way assuresheavenly life in the event of defeat and the state of ultimate glory in thatof victory. So  there is profit in both success and failure. But by now heunderstands well that action is a prerequisite of both the ways. YogeshwarKrishn has also urged him to rid himself of doubts and take refuge in aseer, because he is the only source of the awareness he seeks. However,before he chooses one of the two ways, Arjun makes a humblesubmission.
1. ??Arjun said, ?You have so far commended, O Krishn, both
the Way of knowledge through Renunciation and then the
Way of Selfless Action; so now tell me which one of the twois decidedly more propitious.? ??
Lord Krishn has extolled action by the Way of Knowledge through
Renunciation and then he has spoken approvingly of action done with a
selfless attitude. So Arjun now wishes to be enlightened on the specificway which is in Lord Krishn?s well considered view more conducive tohis well-being. If we are told two ways for going to a certain place, it isbut proper to inquire which one of the two is more convenient. If we donot raise this question, the implication is that we do not have to goanywhere. Yogeshwar Krishn responds to Arjun?s submission thus:
Depeg&ve GJeeÛe-
meVÙeemeb keâce&Ceeb ke=â<Ce hegveÙeexieb Ûe Mebmeefme~
ÙeÛÚs^Ùe SleÙeesjskebâ levces yeÇtefn megefveef§elecedd~~1~~arjuna uvÂca-
sannyÂsaØ karmaàÂØ kçîàa punaryogaØ ca ïaØsasi |
yacchreya etayorekaØ tanme bröhi suniïcitam ||1||

Yatharth Geeta 164
2. ?The Lord said, ?Both renunciation and selfless action achieve
salvation, but of the two the Way of Selfless Action is the
better because it is easier to practice.???
If both the ways are equally effective in bringing about the final
absolution, why is the Way of Selfless Action described as superior?
This is what Lord Krishn has to say about it.
3. ?He, O the mighty-armed (Arjun), who envies none and desires
nothing is fit to be regarded as a true sanyasi and, liberated
from the conflicts of passion and repugnance, he breaks awayfrom worldly bondage.?
The one who is free alike from love and animosity is a sanyasi, a
man of renunciation, irrespective of whether he has chosen the Way of
Knowledge or the Way of Selfless Action. Emancipated from bothattachment and repugnance, he is happily released from the great fearof repeated births.
4. ?It is the ignorant rather than men of wisdom who make a
distinction between the Way of Knowledge and the Way of
Selfless Action, for he who dwells well in any one of the twoattains to God.?
Only they who know but inadequately of spiritual life find the two
ways divergent, because the final outcome of both is the same, namely,
attainment of God.
ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
meVÙeeme: keâce&Ùeesie§e efve:ßesÙemekeâjeJegYeew~leÙeesmleg keâce&meVÙeemeelkeâce&Ùeesiees efJeefMe<Ùeles~~2~~
%esÙe: me efvelÙemeVÙeemeer Ùees ve Ésef° ve keâe*d#eefle~
efveÉ&vÉes efn  ceneyeenes megKeb  yevOeelØecegÛÙeles~~3~~mee*ddKÙeÙeesieew he=Leiyeeuee: ØeJeoefvle ve heefC[lee:~
SkeâcehÙeeefmLele:  mecÙeiegYeÙeesefJe&voles  Heâueced~~4~~ ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-
sannyÂsaÉ karmayogaïca niÉïreyasakarÂvubhau |tayostu karmasannyÂsÂtkarmayogo viïiîyate ||2||
jáeyaÉ sa nityasannyÂsÍ yo na dveîòi na kÂßkîati |
nirdvandvo hi mahÂbÂho sukhaØ bandhÂtpramucyate||3sÂßkhyayogau pçthagbÂlÂÉ pravadanti na paàÅitÂÉ |
ekamapyÂsthitaÉ samyagubhayorvindate phalam ||4||

Chapter 5 165
Ùelmee*ddKÙew: ØeehÙeles mLeeveb leÅeesiewjefhe iecÙeles~
Skebâ mee*ddK Ùeb Ûe Ùeesieb Ûe Ùe: heMÙeefle me heMÙ eefle~~5
meVÙeememleg ceneyeenes og:KeceehlegceÙeesiele:~
ÙeesieÙegòeâes cegefveyeÇ&ÿe veefÛejsCeeefOeieÛÚefle~~6~~5. ??That man perceives reality who regards the Way of
Knowledge and the Way of Selfless Action as identical,
because the liberation attained by knowledge is also achievedby selfless action.??
The goal which is reached by the worshiper of knowledge and
discrimination is also achieved by the doer of selfless action. So he
knows the truth who regards the two ways as similar from the point ofview of consequence. Now, when the two ways converge at the samepoint, why does Lord Krishn pronounce one preferable to the other? Heexplains:
6. ?But, O the mighty-armed, renunciation is well highly
impossible to achieve without selfless action, but the one
whose mind is set on God is soon united with him.?
The giving up of all that we have is most painful without selfless
action. It is indeed impossible if selfless action has not been initiated at
all. Therefore, the sage who reflects on the identical God, and whosemind and senses are stilled, soon attains to that God by the performanceof selfless action.
It is but evident that selfless action has also to be practiced on
the Way of Knowledge, because the requisite action for both the waysis the same. This is the act of yagya, which precisely means ?worship.?The difference between the two ways is only a matter of the worshiper?sattitude. Whereas one devotes himself to the deed after a thoroughappraisal of his own ability and with self-dependence, the other-the doerof selfless action-engages in the task with total reliance upon the adoredGod. So, whereas the former is like a student who studies for anexamination privately, the other is like one who is enrolled in a schoolor college. Both of them have an accomplished teacher to master thesame course, take the same test, and even the certificate to be awarded
yatsÂßkhyaiÉ prÂpyate sthÂnaØ tadyogairapi gamyate |
ekaØ sÂßkhyaØ ca yogaØ ca yaÉ païyati sa païyati||5
sannyÂsastu mahÂbÂho duÉkhamÂptumayogataÉ |yogayukto munirbrahma nacireàÂdhigacchati ||6||

Yatharth Geeta 166
ÙeesieÙegòeâes efJeMegæelcee efJeefpeleelcee efpelesefvõÙe:~
meJe&YetleelceYetleelcee  kegâJe&Veefhe ve  efuehÙeles~~7~~to them is the same. Only their attitudes to their task are different. All
the same it cannot be denied that the student enrolled in an institutionis in a position to avail himself of greater facilities.
Sometime back, saying that passion and anger are formidable
enemies, Lord Krishn urged Arjun to kill them. Arjun found it most painful.Lord Krishn thereupon told him that beyond the body there are thesenses, beyond the senses there is the mind, beyond the mind there isthe intellect, and beyond all these there is the Self, the power at whosebehest he is driven to all his actions. To act with a clear understandingof one?s own strength and with dependence on one?s own ability is theWay of Knowledge. Lord Krishn prompted Arjun to concentrate his mindon him and fight, dedicating all his actions to him and in total freedomfrom attachment and grief. To perform a deed with a sense of surrenderto the worshiped God is the Way of Selfless Action. So the action in thetwo ways is the same and so is the final outcome.
Stressing the same, Lord Krishn now says that the achievement
of renunciation, of the ultimate cessation of good as well as evil actions,is impossible without selfless action. There is no way by which we maysit idly, just telling ourselves: ?I am God, pure and wise. For me there isno action and no bondage. Even if I may appear as participating in evil,it is really only my senses functioning according to their nature.? Thereis no such hypocrisy in Lord Krishn?s words. Even he, the Yogeshwar,cannot, without the required action, bestow the ultimate state upon abeloved friend like Arjun. If he were able to do this, there would be noneed for the Geeta. Action has to be accomplished. The stage ofrenunciation can be achieved only through action and the one who doesit soon realizes God. Lord Krishn now speaks about the characteristicmarks of the man who is blessed with selfless action.
7. ?The doer, who is in perfect control of his body through a
conquest of his senses, pure at heart and single-mindedly
yogayukto viïuddhÂtmÂ vijitÂtmÂ jitendriyaÉ |
sarvabhötÂtmabhötÂtmÂ kurvannapi na lipyate ||7||

Chapter 5 167
vewJe efkeâefÃelkeâjesceerefle Ùegòeâes cevÙesle leòJeefJeled~
heMÙe_ëe=CJevmhe=MeefÀeIeÇVeëe>vieÛÚvmJehe_Õemeved~~8ØeueheefvJeme=pevie=þVegefvce<eefVeefce<eVeefhe  ~
FefvõÙeeCeerefvõÙeeLex<eg Jele&vle Fefle OeejÙeved~~9~~devoted to the God of all beings, is untainted by action even
though he is engaged in it.??
That man is possessed of yog, of selfless action, who has
conquered the body, whose senses are subdued, whose thoughts and
feelings are spotlessly clean, and who has realized his identity withGod, the Spirit of all beings. He remains unblemished even though heis involved in action, because his deeds are aimed at garnering seedsof the highest good for those who lag behind. He is untainted becausehe dwells in the essence that is God, the fountain head of the vitality ofall beings. There is nothing for him hereafter for which he should quest.At the same time, there can be no attachment to what he has leftbehind, because they have all paled into insignificance. So he is notengulfed by his deeds. Thus, we have here a picture of the ultimatestage of the worshiper who has achieved selfless action. Lord Krishnexplains again why this man, blessed with yog, remains unattached toaction.
8-9. ??The man who perceives, in whatever he is doing, whether
hearing, touching, smelling, eating, walking, sleeping,
breathing, giving up or seizing, and opening or closing hiseyes, that only his senses are acting according to theirproperties and that he himself is a non-doer, is indeed theone with true knowledge.??
It is a belief, or rather experience, of the man to whom God is
visibly present that he does absolutely nothing. Rather than being a
mere fancy, it is a firm conviction he has arrived at through theperformance of action. After having known this he cannot but believethat whatever he appears to be doing is really the operation of his sensesaccording to their natural properties. And, when there is nothing higher
naiva kiácitkaromÍti yukto manyeta tattvavit |
païyasáïçàvanspçïaájighrannaïnangacchansvapaáïvasan|8pralapanvisçjangçhàannunmiîannimiîannapi |
indriyÂàÍndriyÂrtheîu vartanta iti dhÂrayan ||9||

Yatharth Geeta 168
yeÇÿeCÙeeOeeÙe keâcee&efCe meÁb lÙekeälJee keâjesefle Ùe:~
efuehÙeles  ve  me  heehesve  he©ehe$eefceJeecYemee~~10~~
keâeÙesve  cevemee  yegæ?ee  kesâJeuewefjefvõÙewjefhe~Ùeesefieve: keâce& kegâJe&efvle meÁb lÙekeälJeelceMegæÙes~~11than God whom he has apprehended, what greater joy can he aspire to
have by touching any other object or being? Had there been somethingbetter beyond, there must have been attachment. But after theattainment of God there is no further goal to strive for. And neither isthere anything left behind for him to renounce. So the man endowedwith attainment is unimmersed in action. This thought is now illustratedby an example.
10. ?The man who acts, dedicating all his actions to God and
abandoning all attachment, is untouched by sin as a lotus
leaf is untouched by water.??
The lotus grows in mud, but its leaf floats above the water. Ripples
pass over it night and day, but if you look at the leaf it is always dry.
Not a drop of water clings to it. So the lotus growing in mud and water isyet unsullied by them. Just so, the man, all of whose actions are mergedinto God (this dissolution occurs only with perception, not before), andwho acts with total detachment because there is nothing beyond to bedesired, is unaffected by action. Yet he is busy with the performance ofaction for the guidance and good of the ones who are behind him. Thisis the point that is stressed in the following verse.
11. ?Sages give up the attachment of their senses, mind, intellect
and body, and act for inner purification.?A sage abandons all desires of his senses, mind, intellect, and
body, and practices selfless action for inner sanctity. Does that mean
that the Self is tainted with impurities even after he has merged intoGod? It cannot be so because after this dissolution the Self becomesone with all beings; he sees his own extension in all beings. So he acts,not for himself, but for the purification and guidance of other beings. Heacts with his mind, intellect and physical organs, but his Self is in a
brahmaàyÂdhÂya karmÂài saßgaØ tyaktvÂ karoti yaÉ |
lipyate na sa pÂpena padmapatramivÂmbhasÂ ||10||
kÂyena manasÂ buddhyÂ kevalairindriyairapi |yoginaÉ karma kurvanti saßgaØ tyaktvÂtmaïuddhaye||11

Chapter 5 169
Ùegòeâ: keâce&Heâueb lÙekeälJee Meeefvleceehveesefle vewef?keâerced~
DeÙegòeâ: keâecekeâejsCe Heâues meòeâes efveyeOÙeles~~12~~
meJe&keâcee&efCe cevemee meVÙemÙeemles megKeb JeMeer~
veJeÉejs hegjs osner vewwJe kegâJe&Ve keâejÙeved~~13~~state of actionlessness and constant peace. He appears to be active
outwardly, but inside him there is only endless tranquility. The ropecannot bind any longer because it is burnt out and what remains is onlythe impression of its twist.
12. ?The sage who sacrifices the fruits of his action to God attains
to his state of sublime repose, but the man who desires
rewards of action is chained by desire.??
The man who is blessed with the final outcome of selfless action
and who dwells in God-the root of all beings, and who has forsaken
desire for the fruits of action because the God who was the goal of hisaction is no longer distant from him, achieves the state of sublimepeace beyond which there is no greater peace and beyond which he willnever again know restlessness. But the wayfarer, who is still on hisway and attached (he has to be attached because the ?fruit? of hisaction, God, is still unattained) to the consequence of his action, isfettered by it. So desires continue to arise until the moment of attainment,and the worshiper has to be on his guard right till that point. My MostRevered teacher, Maharaj Ji, used to say, ?Mark me, maya prevails ifwe are even in the least removed from God and he is removed from us.?Even if the attainment is to be tomorrow, today the worshiper is at bestonly an ignorant man. So the questing worshiper ought not to be careless.Let us see what is further said about this.
13. ?The man who is in perfect control of his heart and mind,
and acts accordingly, dwells blissfully in the abode of his
body with its nine apertures
1 because he neither acts himself
nor makes others act.??
1. The human body, is described as the house of nine gates, such as mouth, ears,
eyes etc.yuktaÉ karmaphalaØ tyaktvÂ ïÂntimÂpnoti naiîòhikÍm |
ayuktaÉ kÂmakÂreàa phale sakto nibadhyate ||12||
sarvakarmÂài manasÂ sannyasyÂste sukhaØ vaïÍ |
navadvÂre pure dehÍ naiva kurvanna kÂrayan ||13||

Yatharth Geeta 170
The man who is in perfect control of himself and dwells, beyond
his body, mind, intellect, and material nature, in his own Self-this man
of restraint undoubtedly neither acts nor is a cause of action. Evenprompting the men left behind to act does not affect his serenity. Thisman who has realized his Self and abides in him, and who has subduedall his organs which provide him with objects of physical pleasure, dwellsin the ultimate bliss that is God. In truth, thus, he neither acts noreffects any undertaking of action.
The same idea is stated differently when Lord Krishn says that
God, too, neither acts nor gets any action accomplished. Theaccomplished teacher, God, the adored one, the realized sage, anenlightened guru, and the endowed one-are all synonymous. No Goddescends from heaven to accomplish anything. When he functions, heoperates through these Self-abiding, reverent, and loving Souls. Thebody is a mere dwelling place for such a Soul. So the action of theSupreme Self is the same as that of the individual Self, because heacts through him. So, in truth, the Self who has become one with Goddoes nothing even while he is engaged in action. The next-verse isagain related to the same problem.
14. ?God creates neither action nor the capacity for action, and
not even the association of action with its fruits, but at the
same time, vitalized by his spirit, it is nature that acts.??
God makes neither the power of beings to act nor actions, nor
does he decide the fruits of action, and all objects and beings act only
under the pressure of innate natural properties. One acts according tothe three properties, tamas, rajas  and sattwa. Nature is vast, but itaffects a man only to the extent to which his natural disposition isvirtuous or vitiated - divine or devilish.
People usually say that it is God who does or gets things done,
and we are mere instruments. It is he who makes us do well or ill. But
ve keâle=&lJeb ve keâcee&efCe ueeskeâmÙe me=peefle ØeYeg:~
ve  keâce&HeâuemebÙeesieb  mJeYeeJemleg  ØeJele&les~~14~~
na kartçtvaØ na karmÂài lokasya sçjati prabhuÉ |
na karmaphalasaØyogaØ svabhavÂstu pravartate ||14||

Chapter 5 171
veeoòes keâmÙeefÛelheeheb ve ÛewJe megke=âleb efJeYeg:~
De%eevesveeJe=leb %eeveb lesve ceg¢eefvle pevleJe:~~15~~
%eevesve leg leo%eeveb Ùes<eeb veeefMeleceelceve:~les<eeceeefolÙeJep%eeveb ØekeâeMeÙeefle lelhejced~~16~~Lord Krishn maintains that God neither acts nor prompts action, and
that he also does not produce favourable or unfavourable circumstances.Men act by themselves according to the compulsions of their inbornnature. They are impelled to act by the inevitability of their inherenttraits; it is not God who acts. Then why do people say that everything isdone by God? Lord Krishn dwells upon the problem.
15. ?The all-pervading God, the Glorious One, accepts neither
men?s sinful acts nor attachment because their knowledge is
enveloped by ignorance (maya).?
The one who has been named God is now described as the
Glorious One because he is embellished with sublime glory. That God,
all powerful and radiant, accepts neither our sins nor our righteous actions.But people yet say that he does everything, because their knowledge isclouded with ignorance. As yet the men who speak so are only mortalbeings, enclosed within bodies. Subject to delusion they can sayanything. So Lord Krishn now elucidates the function of knowledge.
16. ?But the knowledge of one whose ignorance has been
dispelled by Self-perception shines like the sun and renders
God brilliantly visible. ??
The mind, whose darkness has been pierced through by knowledge
of the Self and which has thus acquired true wisdom, is lit up as if with
the light of the sun and God is clearly manifested to it. This does not byany means imply that God is some kind of darkness, for he is truly thesource of all light. He is the fountain of all light, but his light-it appears-is not for us because it is not seen by us. When darkness is sweptaway by perception of the Self-like the Self, like the sun, the resultingknowledge absorbs his brightness within itself. After this there is no
nÂdatte kasyacitpÂpaØ na caiva sukçtaØ vibhuÉ |
ajáÂnenÂvçtaØ jáÂnaØ tena muhyanti jantavaÉ ||15||
jáÂnena tu tadajáÂnaØ yeîÂØ nÂïitamÂtmanaÉ |teîÂmÂdityavajjáÂnaØ prakÂïayati tatparam ||16||

Yatharth Geeta 172
leodyegæÙemleoelceevemleefVe?emlelhejeÙeCee:~
ieÛÚvlÙehegvejeJe=efòeb  %eeveefveOet&lekeâuce<ee:~~17~~efJeÅeeefJeveÙemecheVes yeÇeÿeCes ieefJe nefmleefve~
Megefve ÛewJe Õeheekesâ Ûe heefC[lee: meceoefMe&ve:~~18~~longer any darkness. Here is what Lord Krishn has to say about the
nature of this knowledge:
17. ?Those men attain salvation-after which there is no next birth-
whose mind and intellect are free from delusion, who dwell
with a single mind in God and put themselves at his mercy,and who are freed from all sin by knowledge.??
That state is knowledge in which a man dedicates himself wholly
to God and is dependent on him, with a mind and an intellect shaped
accordingly, and overflowing with his essence. Knowledge is notgarrulousness or being argumentative. The man who is endowed withthis knowledge attains to salvation and is liberated from physical ties.It is such men who are called pandit, men of profound learning andwisdom. Only a man who has achieved this ultimate state deserves thename of pandit.
18. ?Sages who look evenly at a Brahmin, a cow, an elephant, a
dog, and even the most despicable of men are blessed with
the highest degree of knowledge.?
They are realized sages whose sins have been destroyed by
knowledge and who have achieved the state in which there is no further
birth. And such men regard all creatures impartially, making no distinctionbetween a discerning Brahmin and an outcast, or between a dog and anelephant. In their eyes, there is neither any special merit in the wiseand learned Brahmin nor any special demerit in the ostracized man. Forhim neither is a cow holy nor a dog unholy. He does not find any specialgreatness about a massive elephant. Such men of knowledge areimpartial of view and equal-minded. Their eyes are fixed not on theskin, on the external form, but on the Soul-the inner essence. Thedifference is only this: men who know and are reverent to the Self are
tadbuddhayastadÂtmÂnastanniîòhÂstatparÂyaàÂÉ |
gacchantyapunarÂvçttiØ jáÂnanirdhötakalmaîÂÉ ||17||vidyÂvinayasanpanne brÂhmaàe gavi hastini |
ïuni caiva ïvapÂke ca paàÅitÂÉ samadarïinaÉ ||18||

Chapter 5 173
close to God, whereas others straggle behind. Some have gone a stage
ahead, while some are yet lingering behind. Men of knowledge areconscious that the body is but an apparel. So they look at the embodiedSoul and attach no significance to the outward form. They do notdiscriminate.
Lord Krishn was a cow-herder and he had tended cows. So he
should have spoken of this creature in reverential terms. But he hasdone nothing like that and he concedes no place to the cow in dharm.He has only admitted that like other beings, she too has a Soul. Whateverbe the economic importance of cows, their religious elevation is just aninvention of the ignorant with enslaved minds. Lord Krishn said earlierthat ignorant minds are riven with dissensions, because of which theydevise an endless variety of deeds. Moreover, they enunciate theseactions in an affected and embellished language in order to impressothers. This has a devastating effect because their words are alsovitiated. They who listen to these deceptive words gain nothing, but aredestroyed. On the way of Selfless Action, on the contrary, as Arjun hasbeen instructed, the action is prescribed as only one, namely theperformance of yagya which is 'worship'. The invention of the religioussignificance of cows, dogs, elephants, the Peepal tree, and rivers is adoing of ignorant, divided minds. If these animals and objects had anyreal significance, Lord Krishn would have spoken of it. It must, however,be added here that the value of houses of God such as temples andmosques and churches at the initial stage of worship cannot be denied.They are centers of mass inspirational instruction; their usefulness liesin the fact that they are centres of pious instruction.
The eighteenth verse suggests that there are two kinds of sages.
First, there are sages whose knowledge is perfect. Secondly, there aresages who are possessed of reverent knowledge. Let us linger for amoment to see how they are different. It is an axiom that everythinghas at least two stages, the highest-the ultimate stage-and the initial-the lowest stage. The lowest stage of worship is the one at which it iscommenced, when it is taken up with discernment, detachment, and

Yatharth Geeta 174
FnwJe lewefpe&le: meieex Ùes<eeb meecÙes efmLeleb ceve:~
efveoex<eb efn meceb yeÇÿe lemceeodyeÇÿeefCe les efmLelee:~~19dedication, while the highest stage is that at which the final outcome of
the act of worship is about to emerge. The same is true of the Brahminclass-the state of sattwa, when there is the advent of properties thatprovide access to the Supreme Spirit and there is the presence ofknowledge and a reverential attitude. At this stage, all the faculties thattake one to God are spontaneously active within-control of mind, restraintof senses, beginning of the process of intuition-direct perception, steadycontemplation, concentration, and abstract meditation. This is the loweststage of the state that is named Brahmin. Its highest stage is reachedwhen with gradual perfection the Self at last stands face to face withGod and is dissolved in him. Now that which had to be known is perfectlyknown. The sage who has achieved this is the one with perfectknowledge. This sage, who is now beyond rebirth, looks equally atcreatures, because his eyes are turned within to see the enshrinedSelf. So Lord Krishn now describes what is the ultimate lot of this sage:
19. ?They who achieve the state of equality conquer the whole
world within the mortal life itself, because they rest in God
who is also unblemished and impartial.??
Sages with perfectly poised minds are freed from material nature
during their worldly life itself. But what is the relation between an even
mind and conquest of nature? When the world itself is annihilated, whatis the position of the Self? In Lord Krishn?s view, since God is immaculateand impartial, the minds of sages who have known Him are also freedfrom all blemishes and inequalities. The sage becomes one with God.This is the ultimate birthless state and it is acquired when the ability toovercome the enemy, the world of appearances, is fully developed.This ability is there when the mind is controlled and when one hasachieved the state of equality, for the world of appearances, is but anextension of the mind. Lord Krishn then speaks of the distinctive marksof the sage who has known God and merged into him:
ihaiva tairjitaÉ sargo yeîÂØ sÂmye sthitaØ manaÉ |
nirdoîaØ hi samaØ brahma tasmÂdbrahmaài te sthitÂÉ||19

Chapter 5 175
ve Øeù<ÙeseflØeÙeb ØeehÙe veesefÉpeslØeehÙe ÛeeefØeÙeced~
efmLejyegefæjmeccet{es yeÇÿeefJeodyeÇÿeefCe efmLele:~~20~~yee¢emheMex<Jemeòeâelcee efJevolÙeelceefve ÙelmegKeced~
me  yeÇÿeÙeesieÙegòeâelcee  megKece#eÙeceMvegles~~21~~
Ùes efn mebmheMe&pee Yeesiee og?KeÙeesveÙe SJe les~DeeÅevleJevle: keâewvlesÙe ve les<eg jceles yegOe:~~22~~20. ?That equal-minded man dwells in God who is neither
delighted by what others love nor offended by what others
scorn, who is free from doubt, and who has perceived Him??
Such a man transcends feelings of love and hatred. He does not
go wild with joy when he gets something which is cherished and admired
by others. In the same way, he is also not repelled by what others finddistasteful. With such a constant mind, free from doubt, and endowedwith knowledge of the divine Self, he always dwells in God. In otherwords, he is a man of attainment, and-
21. ?That man becomes one with God and enjoys eternal bliss
who is single-mindedly dedicated to him and whose heart is
free from desire for worldly joys.?
The man who has renounced desire for the pleasure of objects of
the external world attains to the felicity of God. His Self is united with
God and the resulting happiness is therefore eternal. But this happinesscomes only to him who is unattached to pleasures.
Is worldly enjoyment a hurdle? Lord Krishn says:
22. ?Since the pleasures arising from the association of senses
with their objects are a cause of grief and are  transitory, Oson of Kunti, men of wisdom do not desire them.?
Not only the skin, but all senses feel the sensation of touch contact.
Seeing is the touch of the eye as hearing is the touch of the ear. Although
seeming pleasant to experience, all the enjoyment arising from thesecontacts of senses with their objects only leads to miserable births.Moreover, these sensual gratifications are also transient and destructible.
na prahçîyetpriyaØ prÂpya nodvijetprÂpya cÂpriyam |
sthirabuddhirasammöÅho brahmavidbrahmaài sthitaÉ||20bÂhyasparïeîvasaktÂtmÂ vindatyÂtmani yatsukham |
sa brahmayogayuktÂtmÂ sukhamakîayamaïnute ||21||
ye hi saØsparïajÂ bhogÂ duÉkhayonaya eva te |ÂdyantavantaÉ kaunteya na teîu ramate budhaÉ ||22||

Yatharth Geeta 176
So Arjun is told that men of discrimination are not entangled in them.
Lord Krishn then enlightens him on the evil that is embodied byattachment to these pleasures.
23. ?That man in this world is a true and blessed yogi who, even
before the death of his mortal body, acquires the ability to
withstand the onslaughts of passion and anger, and conquersthem forever.??
He is the real man (nara=na+raman)-one who is not given to
physical dalliance. Even while he is living in the mortal body, he is
capable of facing the fierce urges of passion and anger, and of destroyingthem. He has achieved selfless action in the world and he is happy. Hehas won the happiness of identity with God in which there is no grief.According to divine ordinance, this happiness is acquired in this mortal,worldly life itself and not after the death of the physical body. This iswhat Sant Kabir intends to convey when he counsels his disciples toplace their hope in this life. The assurance that salvation comes afterdeath is false and given only by unworthy and selfish teachers. LordKrishn also says that the man who succeeds in overcoming his passionand anger in this life itself is the doer of selfless action in this world,and he is blessed with everlasting happiness. Passion and anger,attraction and repulsion, desire for the touching of objects by the senses,are our mortal enemies whom we have to vanquish and destroy. LordKrishn again dwells upon the nature of the doer of selfless action.
24. ?The man who knows his Self and whose happiness and
peace lie within merges into God, and he attains to the final
beatitude that lies in him.?
The man, who is joyous within, at peace within, and illumined
within by his perception of the Self and the identical Universal Spirit,  is
MeÄeâesleernwJe Ùe: mees{gb ØeekeäMejerjefJecees#eCeeled~
keâece?eâesOeesÆJeb Jesieb me Ùegòeâ: me megKeer vej:~~23
ÙeesÓvle:megKeesÓvlejejecemleLeevlepÙeexeflejsJe Ùe:~
me Ùeesieer yeÇÿeefveJee&Ceb yeÇÿeYetleesÓefOeieÛÚefle~~24
ïaknotÍhaiva yaÉ soÅhuØ prÂkïarÍravimokîaàÂt |
kÂmakrodhodbhavaØ vegaØ sa yuktaÉ sa sukhÍ naraÉ||23
yo'ntaÉsukho'ntarÂrÂmastathÂntarjyotireva yaÉ |
sa yogÍ brahmanirvÂàaØ brahmabhöto'dhigacchati ||24

Chapter 5 177
ueYevles yeÇÿeefveJee&Cece=<eÙe: #eerCekeâuce<ee:~
efÚVeÉwOee Ùeleelceeve: meJe&Yetleefnles jlee:~~25~~keâece?eâesOeefJeÙegòeâeveeb Ùeleerveeb ÙeleÛeslemeeced~
DeefYelees yeÇÿeefveJee&Ceb Jele&les efJeefoleelceveeced~~26~~a realized sage who is united with God and who attains to his ineffable
state. In other words, there is first destruction of perversions-alienimpulses such as attachment and aversion, then the emergence ofperception, and finally submersion in the all-pervading ocean of finalbeatitude.
25. ?They attain to the eternal peace of God whose sins have
been destroyed by perception and whose doubts are resolved,
and who are single-mindedly concerned with the good of allbeings.??
He is a man of attainment whose sins have been dispelled by his
vision of God, whose doubts have been done away with, and who is
wholeheartedly devoted to the service of all mankind. Only a man ofthis elevated state can help others, for how can he who is fallen in aditch himself help others to get out? So compassion appears as a naturalattribute of realized sages and they, with their spiritual perception andconquest of the senses, realize the peace that comes with the finaldissolution in God.
26. ?Men who are free from passion and wrath, who have
conquered their mind, and who have had a direct perception
of God, see the all-tranquil Supreme Self wherever they look.??
Lord Krishn thus repeatedly stresses the distinctive features of
the character and life of doers of selfless action in order to motivate
and encourage Arjun and, through him, all his other disciples. Thequestion is now almost resolved. To conclude his argument, however,Lord Krishn reverts to the necessity of contemplating the incoming andoutgoing breath for the realization of this sage?s state. In Chapter 4, hetold us of offering pran to apan, of sacrificing apan to pran, and of the
labhante brahmanirvÂàamçîayaÉ kîÍàakalmaîÂÉ |
chinnadvaidhÂ yatÂtmÂnaÉ sarvabhötahite ratÂÉ ||25||kÂmakrodhaviyuktÂnÂØ yatÍnÂØ yatacetasÂm |
abhito brahmanirvÂàaØ vartate viditÂtmanÂm ||26||

Yatharth Geeta 178
regulation of both the life winds while giving his account   of the process
of yagya. The same subject is taken up again at the end of the presentchapter.
27-28.  ?That sage is liberated forever who shuts out of his mind
all objects of sensual pleasure, keeps his eyes centered
between the two brows, regulates his pran and apan,conquers his senses, mind and intellect, and whose mind isfixed on salvation.?
Lord Krishn reminds Arjun of the vital need of excluding from the
mind all thoughts of external objects as well as of keeping the eyes
fixed steadily between the two brows. Keeping the eyes between thebrows does not simply mean concentrating them at something.  It israther that while the worshiper is sitting erect, his eyes should be pointedahead in a straight line from the midpoint between the brows; they shouldnot wander about restlessly and look right and  left. Keeping the eyesaligned with the ridge of the nose- we must be careful that we do notstart watching the nose-and balancing  pran against apan and keepingthe eyes steadily fixed all the while, we should direct the vision of mind,the Soul, to the breath and let him watch it: when does the breath go in,how long is it held-if it is held in for only half a second, we should not tryto prolong it by force, and how long does it stay out? It is hardlynecessary to say that the name in the breath will ring audibly. Thus,when the vision of mind learns to concentrate steadily on the inhaledand exhaled breath, breathing will gradually become constant, firm, andbalanced. There will be then neither generation of inner desires norassaults on the mind and heart by desires from external sources.Thoughts of external pleasure have already been shut out; now therewill not even arise inner desires. Contemplation then stands steady and
mheMee&vke=âlJee yeefnyee&¢eeb§e#eg§ewJeevlejs YeügJees:~
ØeeCeeheeveew meceew ke=âlJee veemeeYÙevlejÛeeefjCeew~~27~~ÙelesefvõÙeceveesyegefæceg&efveceex#ehejeÙeCe:  ~
efJeielesÛÚeYeÙe?eâesOees Ùe: meoe cegòeâ SJe me:~~28~~
sparïÂnkçtvÂ bahirbÂhyÂØïcakîuïcaivÂntare bhruvoÉ |
prÂàÂpÂnau samau kçtvÂ nÂsÂbhyantaracÂriàau ||27||yatendriyamanobuddhirmunirmokîaparÂyaàaÉ |
vigatecchÂbhayakrodho yaÉ sadÂ mukta eva saÉ ||28||

Chapter 5 179
Yeesòeâejb  Ùe%elehemeeb  meJe&ueeskeâcensÕejced~
megùob meJe&Yetleeveeb %eelJee ceeb Meeefvlece=ÛÚefle~~29~~straight like a stream of oil. A stream of oil does not descend like water,
drop by drop; it comes down in a constant, unbroken line. Similar to thisis the motion of the breath of a sage of attainment. So the man, whohas balanced his pran and apan, conquered his senses, mind andintellect, freed himself from desire, and fear and anger, perfectedcontemplative discipline, and taken refuge in salvation, is ever-liberated.Lord Krishn finally discourses upon where this sage goes after liberationand what he achieves.
29. ?Knowing the truth that it is I who enjoy the offerings of yagya
and penances, that  I am God of all the worlds, and that l am
the selfless benefactor of all beings, he attains to finaltranquility.?
This liberated man, who knows that Lord Krishn-God of the gods
of all worlds-is the recipient and enjoyer of the offerings of all yagya and
penances, and that he is the selfless well-wisher of all beings- knowingall this he achieves the ultimate repose. Lord Krishn says that he is theenjoyer of the worshiper?s yagya of inhaled and exhaled breath as wellas of austerities. He is the one in whom yagya and penances are at lastdissolved and so their doer comes to Him, the ultimate serenity thatresults from the completion of yagya. The  worshiper, liberated fromdesire by selfless action, knows Lord Krishn and realizes him as soonas he is blessed with this knowledge. This is named peace; and theone who achieves it becomes God of gods just as Lord Krishn is.
???????????????
At the beginning of the chapter Arjun raised a question about Lord
Krishn?s alternate praise of the Way of Selfless Action and the Way ofKnowledge through Renunciation. He wished to know that which,according to Lord Krishn?s considered judgement, is doubtlessly superior.Lord Krishn told him that there is ultimate good in both. In both the
bhoktÂraØ yajáatapasÂØ sarvalokamaheïvaram |
suhçdaØ sarvabhötÂnÂØ jáÂtvÂ mÂØ ïÂntimçcchati ||29||

Yatharth Geeta 180
worshiper has to perform the ordained act of yagya, but the Way of
Selfless Action is yet superior. Without such action there is no end ofdesire, and of good and evil deeds. Renunciation is the name, not of ameans, but of the goal itself. The man of renunciation is a doer ofselfless action, a yogi. Godliness is his mark. He neither acts nor makesothers act, and all beings are engaged in action only under the pressureof nature. He is the seer-the pandit-because he knows God. God (Krishn)is known as an outcome of yagya. He is the one into whom breath-recitation, yagya, and purificatory rites all merge. He is the tranquilitywhich the worshiper experiences as an outcome of yagya, that is, withthe attainment of this repose he is transformed into a sage like LordKrishn. Like Lord Krishn and other seers, he also becomes God of godsbecause he is now one with God. That the coming about of thisattainment may take a number of births is a different matter. Chapter 5has thus elucidated the unique and amazing point that the power thatdwells within the sage after his realization of God is no other than thespirit of the Supreme Lord - of the God who is the enjoyer of the offeringsof all yagya and penances.
Thus concludes the Fifth Chapter in the Upanishad of the
Shreemadbhagwadgeeta, on the Knowledge of the Supreme
Spirit, the Science of Yog, and the Dialogue between
Lord Krishn and Arjun, entitled:
??Yagya Bhokta Mahapurushasth Maheshwarah,??
or
??The Supreme God - Enjoyer of Yagya??.
Thus concludes the Most Revered Paramhans Paramanand Ji?s
disciple Swami Adgadanand?s exposition of the Fifth Chapter of
the Shreemadbhagwadgeeta in ??Yatharth Geeta??, entitled:
??Yagya Bhokta Mahapurushasth Maheshwarah??.
HARI OM TAT SAT

Chapter 6 181
CHAPTER 6
THE YOG
OF MEDITATION
Whenever there is rank growth, in the name of dharm, of too
many customs and practices, of forms of worship and prayer, and of
schools and sects, some great Soul appears, makes his advent todemolish them, and to install and strengthen the one and only God, asalso to broaden the path of action that leads to him. The practice ofrenouncing action and thus of being known for wisdom were also all tooprevalent in the age of Lord Krishn. That explains why he affirms, forthe fourth time, at the beginning of this chapter, that action is an essential,inevitable requirement of the Ways of both Knowledge and SelflessAction.
He told Arjun in Chapter 2 that there was no more propitious a
way for a Kshatriy than to fight. If he loses the war, he will be rewardedwith godly existence, while victory will bring him ultimate bliss. Knowingthis, he should fight. Lord Krishn further pointed out to him that he hadimparted this precept to him in regard to the Way of Knowledge: theprecept that he should wage war. The Way of Knowledge does notimply inactivity. While it is true that the initial urge comes from anaccomplished teacher himself, the follower of knowledge has to engagein action after self-appraisal and due judgement of the pros and cons,and of his strength. Fighting is thus unavoidable on the Way ofKnowledge.
In Chapter 3, Arjun asked Lord Krishn why, when he thought the
Way of Knowledge superior to that of Selfless Action, he was promptinghim to difficult acts. In the prevailing circumstance, he found the Wayof Selfless Action more hazardous. Thereupon he was told by Lord

Yatharth Geeta 182
ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
Deveeefßele: keâce&Heâueb keâeÙeË keâce& keâjesefle Ùe:~
me meVÙeemeer Ûe Ùeesieer Ûe ve efvejefiveve& Ûeeef?eâÙe:~~1~~Krishn that he had imparted both the ways, but according to the
provisions of neither of them is it allowed to go along without theperformance of action. A man does not achieve the state ofactionlessness by just not commencing work, nor does he attain toultimate liberation by abandoning an undertaken enterprise. The ordainedprocess of yagya has to be accomplished for both the ways.
So Arjun was well acquainted with the truth that, whether he prefers
the Way of Knowledge or the Way of Selfless Action, he has to act. Yethe again asked Lord Krishn in Chapter 5 which of the two ways wasbetter from the point of view of outcome; And which was moreconvenient? Lord Krishn replied that both were equally propitious. Boththe ways take one to the same goal and yet the Way of Selfless Actionis superior to that of Knowledge, because no one can gain yog withoutacquitting himself of selfless action. The required action is the same inboth cases. There is thus now no ambiguity about the fact that onecannot be either an ascetic or yogi without performing the appointedtask. The only difference is between the attitudes of the wayfarers whotread along the two ways.
1. ??The Lord said, ?The man who performs the ordained task
without desiring its fruits, rather than the one who just gives
up (lighting) the sacred fire or action, is a sanyasi and a yogi.???
Lord Krishn insists that only that man who has made true
renunciation or achieved yog who engages in the one action that is
worthy of doing with absolutely no desire for any rewards. No onebecomes a sanyasi or a yogi by just desisting from the ordained action.There are many kinds of work, but out of them the action which is fit tobe undertaken and which is ordained is only one. And this one action isyagya which means ?worship,? the one means for the attainment ofGod. The practice of it is action; and the man who does it is a sanyasi
ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-
anÂïçtaÉ karmaphalaØ kÂryaØ karma karoti yaÉ |
sa sannyÂsÍ ca yogÍ ca na niragnirna cÂkriyaÉ ||1||

Chapter 6 183
Ùeb meVÙeemeefceefle ØeengÙeexieb leb efJeefæ heeC[Je~
ve ¢emeVÙemleme¿uhees Ùeesieer YeJeefle keâ§eve~~2~~Dee®®#eesceg&vesÙeexieb  keâce&  keâejCecegÛÙeles~
Ùeesiee¤{mÙe lemÙewJe Mece: keâejCecegÛÙeles~~3~~
Ùeoe efn vesefvõÙeeLex<eg ve keâce&mJeveg<eppeles~meJe&me¿uhemeVÙeemeer Ùeesiee¤{mleoesÛÙeles~~4~~and a yogi. If a man has just stopped lighting fire or tells himself
complacently that he has no use for action because he  possessesSelf-knowledge, he is neither a sanyasi nor a doer of selfless action.Lord Krishn further speaks about this:
2. ?Remember, O Arjun, that yog (selfless action) is the same
as renunciation (knowledge), for no man can be a yogi without
a total rejection of desire.?
What we know as renunciation is also yog, for no man can be a
yogi without giving up all his desires. In other words, sacrifice of desire
is essential for men who have chosen either of the ways. Superficiallyit appears so easy, for all that we need to do in order to become a yogi-sanyasi is to claim that we are free from desire. But according to LordKrishn it is by no means so.
3. ?Whereas selfless action is the means for the contemplative
man who wishes to achieve yog, a total absence of will is the
means for one who has attained to it.?
Performance of action to achieve yog is the way for the reflective
man who aspires to selfless action. But when repeated practice of the
deed gradually brings one to the stage at which the final outcome ofselfless action emerges, absence of all desire is the means. One is notrid of desire before this stage; and-
4. ?A man is said to have achieved yog when he is unattached
to both sensual pleasure and action.?This is the stage when a man is not given to sensual pleasure,
nor to action. When the culmination of yog is once reached, who is
there beyond to strive and look for? So there is no longer any need of
yaØ sannyasamiti prahuryogaØ taØ viddhi pÂàÅava |
na hyasannyastasaßkalpo yogÍ bhavati kaïcana ||2||ÂrurukîormuneryogaØ karma kÂraàamucyate |
yogÂröÅhasya tasyaiva ïamaÉ kÂraàamucyate ||3||
yadÂ hi nendriyÂrtheîu na karmasvanuîajjate |sarvasaßkalpasannyÂsÍ yogÂröÅhastadocyate ||4||

Yatharth Geeta 184
Gæjsoelceveelceeveb   veelceeveceJemeeoÙesled~
DeelcewJe ¢eelcevees yevOegjelcewJe efjhegjelceve:~~5~~yevOegjelceelcevemlemÙe ÙesveelcewJeelcevee efpele:~
Deveelcevemleg  Me$eglJes  JelexleelcewJe  Me$egJeled~~6~~even the prescribed task of worship and, therefore, of attachment to
action. This is the point when attachments are completely broken. Thisis renunciation-(sanyas); and this is also achievement of yog.  While aworshiper is still on his way and has not yet arrived at this point, thereis nothing like renunciation. Lord Krishn then speaks about  the profitthat accrues from the attainment of yog:
5. ?Since the Soul enshrined in a man is his friend as well as
foe, it is binding on a man to lift himself by his own effort
rather than degrade himself.??
It is man?s duty to work for the salvation of his Soul. He must not
tempt him to damnation, for the embodied Soul is both his friend and
enemy. Let us now see, in Lord Krishn?s words, when the Self is afriend and when an adversary.
6. ?The Self is a friend to the man who has overcome his mind
and senses, but he is an enemy to one who has failed to do
so.??
To the man who has vanquished his mind and senses, the Soul
within is a friend, but to the man who has not subdued his mind and
senses, he is an enemy.
In the fifth and sixth verses Lord Krishn thus insists repeatedly
that a man should redeem his Self by his own effort. He must notdegrade him, because the Self is a friend. Besides him, besides theSelf, there is neither any friend nor any enemy. It is so because, if aman has restrained his mind and senses, his Soul acts as a friend andbrings him the highest good. But, if a man?s mind and senses are notrestrained, his Soul turns into an enemy that drags him to re-birth inlower forms of life and to endless misery. Men are fond of saying, ?I am
uddharedÂtmanÂtmÂnaØ nÂtmÂnamavasÂdayet |
Âtmaiva hyÂtmano bandhurÂtmaiva ripurÂtmanaÉ ||5||bandhurÂtmÂtmanastasya yenÂtmaivÂtmanÂ jitaÉ |
anÂtmanastu ïatrutve vartetÂtmaiva ïatruvat ||6||

Chapter 6 185
efpeleelceve: ØeMeevlemÙe hejceelcee meceeefnle:~
Meerlees<CemegKeog?Kes<eg leLee ceeveeheceeveÙees:~~7~~%eeveefJe%eevele=hleelcee ketâ?mLees efJeefpelesefvõÙe:~
Ùegòeâ FlÙegÛÙeles Ùeesieer meceuees°eMcekeâeÃeve:~~8~~Soul.? So there is nothing for us to worry about. We cite evidence from
the Geeta itself. Isn?t it said there, we ask, that weapons cannot pierceand fire cannot burn and wind cannot wither the Self? He, the deathless,immutable and universal, is therefore me. Believing so, we pay littleheed to the warning in the Geeta that this Soul within us can alsodescend to an inferior, degraded level. Fortunately, however, he canalso be saved and elevated; and Lord Krishn has made known to Arjunthe action which is worthy of being done and which leads the Soul toabsolution. The following verse indicates the qualities of a benign, friendlySelf.
7. ?God is ever and inseparably present in the serene heart of
the Self-abiding man who is unmoved by the contradictions
of heat and cold, happiness and sorrow, and fame andinfamy.??
God dwells inextricably in the heart of the man who rests in his
own Self and reacts evenly to the dualities of nature such as heat and
cold, pain and pleasure, and honour and humiliation. Perfect reposeflows through one who has conquered the mind along with the senses.This is the stage when the Soul is liberated.
8. ?The yogi, whose mind is quenched with knowledge-both
divine and intuitive, whose devotion is steady and constant,
who has conquered his senses well, and who makes nodistinction between objects ostensibly as different as earth,rock, and gold, is said to have realized God.??
The yogi who has achieved this state is said to be endowed with
yog. He has reached the crowning point of yog which Yogeshwar Krishn
has portrayed in verses 7-12 in Chapter 5. Perception of God and the
jitÂtmanaÉ praïÂntasya paramÂtmÂ samÂhitaÉ |
ïÍtoîàasukhaduÉkheîu tathÂ mÂnÂpamÂnayoÉ ||7||jáÂnavijáÂnatçptÂtmÂ köòstho vijitendriyaÉ |
yukta ityucyate yogÍ samaloîòrÂïmakÂácanaÉ ||8||

Yatharth Geeta 186
megùefvce$eeÙeg&oemeerveceOÙemLeÉs<ÙeyevOeg<eg~
meeOeg<Jeefhe Ûe heehes<eg meceyegefæefJe&efMe<Ùeles~~9~~consequent enlightenment are knowledge. The worshiper is but groveling
in the mire of ignorance if there is even the slightest distance betweenhim and the adored God and the desire to know him remains unfulfilled.What is called ?intuitive? knowledge (vigyan)
1 here is knowledge of God?s
functioning through things, acts, and relations (the manifest universe)which reveal how he is all-pervading, how he prompts, how he guidesinnumerable Souls simultaneously, and how he is knower of all times-past, present, and future. He begins to guide from the very momentwhen he makes his advent in a heart as the revered one, but theworshiper is unable to know this at the initial stage. It is only when hehas reached the culmination of his contemplative exercise that he gainsfull awareness of God?s ways. This is vigyan. The heart of the man whois accomplished in yog is satiated with this achievement combinedwith his knowledge of God and accurate insight. Continuing with hisaccount of this adept in yog, Lord Krishn adds:
9. ?That man is indeed superior who view all with an equal mind:
friends and foes, the antagonistic, indifferent, neutral or
jealous, kinsmen, and the righteous as well as sinners.??
After perceptions of God, a sage is both equal and even-minded.
Lord Krishn said in the last chapter that sages who are blessed with
knowledge and discrimination regard with an impartial eye a Brahmin,an outcast, and animals so diverse as a cow, a dog, and an elephant.The verse under discussion complements what was said before. Thatman is doubtlessly a man of excellence who looks equally at all kindsof people, from the highest to the lowest, from the most virtuous to themost wicked, and from the most loving to the most malicious,irrespective of their feelings for him. He looks at the course of Soulswithin them rather than at their external deeds. The only difference he,therefore, sees between diverse beings is that while some have
1. An apparently different interpretation of the word will be found in chapter 7.suhçnmitrÂryudÂsÍnamadhyasthadveîyabandhuîu |
sÂdhuîvapi ca pÂpeîu samabuddhirviïiîyate ||9||

Chapter 6 187
Ùeesieer ÙegÀeerle meleleceelceeveb jnefme efmLele:~
Skeâekeâer ÙeleefÛeòeelcee efvejeMeerjheefj«en:~~10~~ascended to higher steps and gotten close to the state of purity, others
have lagged behind and are still lingering on the lower steps. All thesame, he sees the capacity for salvation in all.
In the next five verses, Lord Krishn describes how a man comes
to the possession of yog, how he practices yagya, the nature of theplace where the deed is performed, the seat and the posture of theworshiper, the laws which regulate his food and recreation, and sleepand wakefulness, and the quality of effort required for theaccomplishment of yog. The Yogeshwar has done this, so that we tooare enabled to perform the appointed deed of yagya by following hisprecepts.
A brief review of the relevant points is necessary at this point.
Yagya was named in Chapter 3 and Lord Krishn said that yagya is theordained action. In Chapter 4, then, he elaborated the nature of yagyain which the outgoing breath is sacrificed to the incoming breath, theincoming breath offered as oblation to the outgoing breath, and themind is restrained through serenity of the vital life-winds. The precisemeaning of yagya is, as we have seen, ?worship,? the deed that enablesthe worshiper to traverse the path to the adored God. Lord Krishn hasalso dwelt upon it in Chapter 5. But matters such as the seat of theworshiper, the place of worship, the posture of the worshiper, and themanner of worship have not yet been touched upon. It is only now thatthese subjects are taken up.
10. ?The yogi, engaged in self-conquest, should devote himself
to the practice of yog in loneliness in a secluded place,
controlling his mind, body and senses, and rid of desire andacquisitiveness.??
Being all alone in a place where there are no distractions, restraint
of mind, body, and senses, and a complete rejection of attachments
are all essential for a man who is engaged in the task of Self-realization.
yogÍ yuájÍta satatamÂtmÂnaØ rahasi sthitaÉ |
ekÂkÍ yatacittÂtmÂ nirÂïÍraparigrahaÉ ||10||

Yatharth Geeta 188
MegÛeew osMes Øeefle?ehÙe efmLejceemeveceelceve:~
veelÙegefÛÚ^leb veeefleveerÛeb ÛewueeefpevekegâMeesòejced~~11~~le$ewkeâe«eb ceve: ke=âlJee ÙeleefÛeòesefvõÙeef?eâÙe:~
GheefJeMÙeemeves ÙegÀÙeeÅeesieceelceefJeMegæÙes~~12~~The following verse contains an account of the place and the seat which
are conducive to the exercise.
11. ?At a clean spot he should devise a seat of kush-grass
2 or
deer-skin covered with a piece of cloth, which is neither too
high nor too low.??
Cleanliness of place is a question of sweeping and wiping it to
keep it neat and tidy. In such a clean place, the worshiper should  make
for himself a seat of grass or deer-skin, on top of which there is spreada cover of fabric such as silk, or of wool. However, the  seat may alsobe just a simple wooden board. But whatever it is, it should be firm, andneither too high nor too low. The intent behind  all this is that somethingshould be spread on the ground to cover it; it may be anything-skin, amat, a piece of any kind of cloth, or even a wooden plank. It is importantthat the seat is not shaky. Again, it should be neither too high from theground nor too low. My Revered teacher, Maharaj Ji, used to sit on anabout five-inch high seat. Once it so happened that some devotees gothim a marble seat that was about a foot high. Maharaj Ji sat on it onlyonce and said, ?No, this is too high. A sadhu should not sit too high. Itonly makes them vain. That does not mean, though, that they shouldsit too low either, for that gives rise to a sense of inferiority-of contemptfor oneself.? So he had the marble seat put away in the forest. MaharajJi never went there, and neither does anybody else now. That reallywas an exercise in a practical lesson by the great man. So the seat ofa worshiper should not be too high. If it is too high, vanity will overtakehim even before he commences the task of divine adoration. After thuscleaning a spot and making a firm and reasonably elevated seat on it,-
2. Kush: a kind of grass considered holy and forming an essential requirement of
Indian religious ceremonies.ïucau deïe pratiîòhÂpya sthiramÂsanamÂtmanaÉ |
nÂtyucchritaØ nÂtinÍcaØ cailÂjinakuïottaram ||11||tatraikÂgraØ manaÉ kçtvÂ yatacittendriyakriyaÉ |
upaviïyÂsane yuájyÂdyogamÂtmaviïuddhaye ||12||

Chapter 6 189
meceb  keâeÙeefMejes«eerJeb  OeejÙeVeÛeueb  efmLej:~
mecØes#Ùe veeefmekeâe«eb mJeb efoMe§eeveJeueeskeâÙeved~~13~~ØeMeevleelcee  efJeieleYeeryeÇ&ÿeÛeeefj?eles  efmLele:~
ceve: mebÙecÙe ceefÛÛeòees Ùegòeâ Deemeerle celhej:~~14~~12. ?He should then sit on it and practice yog, concentrating his
mind and restraining the senses, for self-purification.?
Next, then, the posture of sitting (according to the provision,
meditation is done in a sitting posture)-the manner in which the worshiper
should sit while engaged in contemplation-is taken up.
13. ?Holding his body, head, and neck firmly erect, his eyes
should concentrate on the tip of the nose, looking neither
right nor left.??
In the course of meditation, the worshiper should keep his body,
neck, and head straight, steady, and unmoving, like a column of wood
as it were. Sitting erect and firm like this, he should keep his eyes fixedon the tip of his nose. Rather than meaning that he  should watch the tipof the nose, the directive is that the eyes should look straight in line
with the nose. The tendency of eyes of restlessly flitting here and there
must be curbed. Looking straight in line with the nose, the worshipershould sit unmoving, and-
14. ?Abiding in continence, fearless, serene at heart, alert and
restrained in mind, he should surrender himself firmly to
me.?
What actually does continence (brahmcharya vrat)-celibacy-mean?
People usually say that it is restraint of the sexual urge. But it has been
the experience of sages that such restraint is impossible so long as themind is associated with objects, sights, touch, and sounds which inflamethe urge. A true celibate (brahmchari) is rather one who is engaged inthe task of realizing God (Brahm).
The brahmchari is a man of Brahm-like conduct: a doer of the
appointed task of yagya that leads men to attainment and ultimate
samaØ kÂyaïirogrÍvaØ dhÂrayanØacalaØ sthiraÉ |
samprekîya nÂsikÂgraØ svaØ diïaïcÂnavalokayan ||13||praïÂntÂtmÂ vigatabhÍrbrahmacÂrivrate sthitaÉ |
manaÉ saØyamya maccitto yukta ÂsÍta matparaÉ ||14||

Yatharth Geeta 190
ÙegÀeVesJeb meoelceeveb Ùeesieer efveÙeleceeveme:~
Meeefvleb efveJee&Cehejceeb celmebmLeeceefOeieÛÚefle~~15~~veelÙeëe>lemleg ÙeesieesÓefmle ve Ûewkeâevleceveëe>le:~
ve Ûeeefle mJehveMeeruemÙe pee«elees vewJe Ûeepeg&ve~~16~~dissolution in the eternal, immutable God. While doing it, the external
sensations of touch and of all such contacts of the mind and othersenses have to be excluded in order to concentrate the mind on
contemplation of God, on the incoming and the outgoing breath, and onmeditation. There are no external memories when the mind rests onGod. So long as these memories last, the absorption in God isincomplete. Currents of deviation flow through the mind, not throughthe body. When the mind is wholly occupied with its adoration of God,not only does the sexual urge but all the other physical urges alsocease. So dwelling in conduct that will take him to God, free from fear,in a state of repose, and with a restrained mind, the devoted worshipershould surrender himself totally to an accomplished teacher. But whatis the outcome of all this?
15. ?The yogi with a restrained mind who thus meditates on me
incessantly at last attains to the sublime peace that dwells in
me.?
The yogi who thus always reflects on Lord Krishn, an ideal,
accomplished teacher and dwells in God, with a controlled mind achieves
his sublime peace. So Arjun is told to constantly devote himself to thetask. The treatment of the subject is now almost complete. In the nexttwo verses, Lord Krishn then points out the importance of physicaldiscipline, regulated food, and recreation for the worshiper who aims atthe conquest of ultimate bliss.
16. ?This yog, O Arjun, is neither achieved by one who eats too
much or too little, nor by one who sleeps too much or too
little.??
Moderation in food and sleep are necessary for a man who wishes
to be a yogi. Now, if the man who eats and sleeps immoderately cannot
yuájannevaØ sadÂtmÂnaØ yogÍ niyatamÂnasaÉ |
ïÂntiØ nirvÂàaparamÂØ matsaØsthÂmadhigacchati ||15||nÂtyaïnatastu yogo'sti na caikÂntamanaïnataÉ |
na cÂtisvapnaïÍlasya jagrato naiva cÂrjuna ||16||

Chapter 6 191
achieve yog, who can?
17. ?Yog, the destroyer of all grief, is achieved only by those
who regulate their food and recreation, who strive according
to their capacity, and who sleep in moderation.?
If a man eats too much, he is overtaken by lethargy, sleep, and
negligence. And the act of meditation is simply not possible in such a
condition. On the contrary, fasting will weaken the body and there willnot be enough strength to even sit straight and firm. According to myrevered teacher, one should eat a little less than one?s need. Recreation,as understood here, is walking according to the available space. Somephysical exercise is a necessity; circulation is slowed down in theabsence of such exertion and one falls  prey to illness. How much aman sleeps or remains awake is determined by age, food, and habit.The most exalted Maharaj Ji used to tell us that a yogi should sleep forfour hours and be constantly engaged in meditation. However, menwho curb their sleep by force soon lose their sanity. Along with allthese, there should also be sufficient effort for the accomplishment ofthe undertaken task, for without this the act of worship cannot be carriedout well. He succeeds in achieving yog who excludes all thoughts ofexternal objects from his mind and who is constantly engaged inmeditation. This is what Lord Krishn emphasizes again:
18. ?A man is said to be endowed with yog when, restrained by
the practice of selfless action and contented with Self, his
mind is freed from all desires.??
Thus, when disciplined by the practice of selfless action, the mind
of a man is firmly centered on God and is indeed dissolved in him, and
when there remains no desire, the worshiper is said to have attained toyog. Let us now see what a well-restrained mind is.
ÙegòeâenejefJenejmÙe  ÙegòeâÛes°mÙe  keâce&meg~
ÙegòeâmJehveeJeyeesOemÙe Ùeesiees YeJeefle og:Kene~~17~~Ùeoe  efJeefveÙeleb  efÛeòeceelcevÙesJeeJeefle?les~
efve:mhe=n: meJe&keâecesYÙees Ùegòeâ FlÙegÛÙeles leoe~~18~~
yuktÂhÂravihÂrasya yuktaceîòasya karmasu |
yuktasvapnÂvabodhasya yogo bhavati duÉkhahÂ ||17||yadÂ viniyataØ cittamÂtmanyevÂvatiîòhate |
nispçhaÉ sarvakÂmebhyo yukta ityucyate tadÂ ||18||

Yatharth Geeta 192
ÙeLee oerhees efveJeelemLees vesÁles meeshecee mce=lee~
Ùeesefievees ÙeleefÛeòemÙe ÙegÀelees Ùeesieceelceve:~~19~~
Ùe$eeshejceles  efÛeòeb  efve®æb  ÙeesiemesJeÙee~
Ùe$e ÛewJeelceveelceeveb heMÙeVeelceefve leg<Ùeefle~~20~~19. ?An analogy is (usually) drawn between the lamp whose flame
does not flicker because there is no wind and the fully
restrained mind of a yogi engaged in contemplation of God.??
When a lamp is kept where there is not a whiff of air, its wick
burns steadily and the flame goes straight up-it does not tremble. So it
is used as a simile for the subdued mind of a yogi who has completelygiven himself up to God. However, the lamp is just an illustration. Thekind of lamp that is spoken of here is now going almost out of use. Solet us take yet another example. When an incense- stick is burnt, itssmoke rises straight up if it is undisturbed by wind. But this, again, isno more than an analogy between smoke and the mind of a yogi. Truethat the mind has been conquered and restrained, but it is still there.What spiritual splendour is realized when the restrained mind too isdissolved?
20. ?In the state in which even the yog-restrained mind is
dissolved by a direct perception of God, he (the worshiper)
rests contented in his Self.??
This state is achieved only by a constant and long practice of
yog. In the absence of such exercise, there can be no restraint of the
mind. So when the intellect, the refined mind that has been curbed byyog, also ceases to be because it is absorbed in God, the worshiperperceives him through his Self and abides with contented happiness inhis own Self. He apprehends God, but he dwells contented in his Soul.In the moment of attainment, he sees God, face to face as it were, butthe very next moment he finds his own Self overflowing with the eternalglories of that God. God is immortal, constant, unmanifest, and vital;and now the worshiper?s soul too is imbued with these divine attributes.True, but now it is also beyond thought. So long as desire and its urges
yathÂ dÍpo nivÂtastho neßgate sopamÂ smçtÂ |
yogino yatacittasya yuájato yogamÂtmanaÉ ||19||
yatroparamate cittaØ niruddhaØ yogasevayÂ |
yatra caivÂtmanÂtmÂnaØ païyannÂtmani tuîyati ||20||

Chapter 6 193
megKeceelÙeefvlekebâ Ùeòeoddyegefæ«ee¢eceleerefvõÙeced~
Jesefòe Ùe$e ve ÛewJeeÙeb efmLele§eueefle leòJele:~~21~~
Ùeb ueyOJee Ûeehejb ueeYeb cevÙeles veeefOekebâ lele:~
ÙeefmceefvmLelees ve og:Kesve ieg®Ceeefhe efJeÛeeuÙeles~~22~~leb efJeÅeeoddog:KemebÙeesieefJeÙeesieb Ùeesiemeef_%eleced~
me efve§eÙesve ÙeesòeâJÙees ÙeesieesÓefveefJe&CCeÛeslemee~~23~~exist, we cannot possess the Self. But when the mind is restrained and
then dissolved by direct perception, the very next moment after thevisionary experience the embodied Soul is endowed with all thetranscendental qualities of God. And it is for this reason that theworshiper now lives happily and contented in his own Self. This Self iswhat he really is. This is the point of crowning glory for him. The idea isfurther developed in the next verse.
21. ?After knowing God, he (the yogi) dwells forever and
unwavering in the state in which he is blessed with the eternal,
sense-transcending joy that can be felt only by a refined andsubtle intellect; and...??
Such is the state after attainment in which the worshiper lives
forever and from which he never strays. Moreover,-22. ?In this state, in which he believes that there can be no greater
good than the ultimate peace he has found in God, he is
unshaken by even the direst of all griefs.??
After he is once blessed with God?s transcendental peace, settled
firmly in the state of his realization, the yogi Is freed from all grief, and
now even the most painful sorrow cannot affect him. It is so becausethe mind, that feels, is now itself dissolved. So-
23. ?It is a duty to practice this yog, untouched by miseries of
the world, with vigour and determination, and without a sense
of ennui.?
That which is equally free from worldly attraction and repulsion is
named yog. Yog is experiencing the final beatitude. Attainment of the
sukhamÂtyantikaØ yattadbuddhigrÂhyamatÍndriyam |
vetti yatra na caivÂyaØ sthitaïcalati tattvataÉ ||21||
yaØ la bdhvÂ cÂparaØ lÂbhaØ manyate nÂdhikaØ tataÉ|
yasmisthito na duÉkhena guruàÂpi vicÂlyate ||22||
taØ vidyÂdduÉkhasaØyogaviyogaØ yogasaØjáitam |
sa niïcayena yoktavyo yogo'nirviààacetasÂ ||23||

Yatharth Geeta 194
me¿uheØeYeJeevkeâeceebmlÙekeälJee meJee&veMes<ele:~
cevemewJesefvõÙe«eeceb  efJeefveÙecÙe  mecevlele:~~24~~
Mevew:  Mevew®hejcesoddyegæ?ee  Oe=efleie=nerleÙee~DeelcemebmLeb ceve: ke=âlJee ve efkeâefÃeoefhe efÛevleÙesled~~25
Ùelees Ùelees efve§ejefle ceve§eÃeueceefmLejced~
lelemlelees efveÙecÙewleoelcevÙesJe JeMeb veÙesled~~26~~ultimate essence, that is God, is yog. Engaging in this yog without a
sense of monotony or boredom (ennui) and with resolution, is a sacredobligation. He who is patiently engaged in selfless action is the onewho succeeds in achieving yog.
24. ?Abandoning all desire, lust, and attachment, and pulling in
by an exercise of the mind the numerous senses from all
sides, -??
It is man?s duty to sacrifice all the desires that arise from will
along with attachment and worldly pleasure and restrain well with his
mind, the senses from straying here and there.  And after having donethis,-
25. ?His intellect should also rein in the mind firmly and make it
contemplate nothing except God and, thus step by step, he
should proceed towards the attainment of final liberation.??
The final dissolution in God comes only gradually with the practice
of yog. When the mind is fully under control, the Self is united with the
Supreme Spirit. However, at the beginning, when the worshiper has justset out on the path, he has to concentrate his mind patiently on, andthink of nothing else except, God. The way of this spiritual enterprise isthat attainment comes only with constant application. But at the outset,the mind is restless and  refuses to stay at one point. This is whatYogeshwar Krishn speaks of now.
26. ?Doing away with the causes that make the inconstant and
fickle wander among worldly objects, he should devote his
mind to God alone.??
saßkalpaprabhavÂnkÂmÂØstyaktvÂ sarvÂnaïeîataÉ |
manasaivendriyagrÂmaØ viniyamya samantataÉ ||24||
ïanaiÉ ïanairuparamedbuddhyÂ dhçtigçhÍtayÂ |ÂtmasaØsthaØ manaÉ kçtvÂ na kiácidapi cintayet ||25||
yato yato niïcarati manaïcaácalamasthiram |
tatastato niyamyaitadÂtmanyeva vaïaØ nayet ||26||

Chapter 6 195
ØeMeevlecevemeb å?esveb Ùeesefieveb megKecegòececed~
Ghewefle Meevlejpemeb yeÇÿeYetlecekeâuce<eced~~27~~ÙegÀeVesJeb meoelceeveb Ùeesieer efJeielekeâuce<e:~
megKesve yeÇÿemebmheMe&celÙevleb megKeceMvegles~~28~~Strictly keeping out all allurements that tempt the changeable
and restless mind to associate with worldly objects, the worshiper should
try repeatedly to confine it to the Self. It is often contended that themind should be let free to go wherever it tends to go. After all, whereelse can it go except to nature, which is also a creation of God? So if itroams amidst nature, it is not transgressing the bounds of God. Butaccording to Lord Krishn this is a misconception. There is no room forsuch beliefs in the Geeta. It is Lord Krishn?s injunction that the veryorgans through which the mind strays here and there should be curbedin order to devote it solely to God. Restraint of mind is possible. Butwhat is the consequence of this restraint?
27. ?The most sublime happiness is the lot of the yogi whose
mind is at peace, who is free from evil, whose passion and
moral blindness have been dispelled, and who has becomeone with God.??
Nothing is superior to the happiness that comes to this yogi, for
this is the happiness that results from identity with God; and this ultimate
bliss comes only to that man who is perfectly at peace in his heart andmind, free from sin, and whose property of passion and moral blindnesshas been subdued. The same idea is stressed again.
28. ?Thus constantly dedicating his Self to God, the immaculate
yogi experiences the eternal bliss of realization.?The emphasis here is on sinlessness and continuous devotion.
The yogi needs to possess these qualities before he can experience
the blessedness of touching God and merging into him. So worship is anecessity.
praïÂntamanasaØ hyenaØ yoginaØ sukhamuttamam |
upaiti ïÂntarajasaØ brahmabhötamakalmaîam ||27||yuájannevaØ sadÂtmÂnaØ yogÍ vigatakalmaîaÉ |
sukhena brahmasaØsparïamatyantaØ sukhamaïnute ||28||

Yatharth Geeta 196
meJe&YetlemLeceelceeveb meJe&Yetleeefve Ûeelceefve~
F&#eles ÙeesieÙegòeâelcee meJe&$e meceoMe&ve:~~29~~Ùees ceeb heMÙeefle meJe&$e meJeË Ûe ceefÙe heMÙeefle~
lemÙeenb ve ØeCeMÙeeefce me Ûe ces ve ØeCeMÙeefle~~30~~
meJe&YetleefmLeleb Ùees ceeb YepelÙeskeâlJeceeefmLele:~meJe&Lee Jele&ceeveesÓefhe me Ùeesieer ceefÙe Jele&les~~31~~29. ??The worshiper, whose Self has achieved the state of yog
and who sees all with an equal eye, beholds his own Self in
all beings and all beings in his Self.?
Yog brings about the state in which the even-minded worshiper
sees the extension of his Soul in all beings and the existence of all
beings in his own Soul. The advantage of the perception of this unity ofall beings is the burden of the next verse.
30. ?From the man, who sees me as the Soul in all beings and
all beings in me (Vasudev), I am not hidden and he is not
hidden from me.?
God is manifest to the man who sees Him in all beings (that all
beings are imbued with his Spirit) and all beings as abiding in Him. God
also knows his worshiper in the same way. This is the direct encounterbetween the yogi and his prompter. This is the feeling of kinship betweenGod and man, and salvation in this case arises from the feeling ofoneness that brings the worshiper intimately close to his adored God.
31. ?The even-minded yogi (who has known the unity of the
individual Soul and the Supreme Spirit) who adores me
(Vasudev), the Soul in all beings, abides in me no matterwhatever he does.??
The yogi who realizes the unity of the individual Soul and the
Supreme Spirit has risen above plurality and known the unity that binds
the whole universe. With this unified vision, he contemplates God andnone else, for there is no one except God left for him. Whatever mantle
sarvabhötasthamÂtmÂnaØ sarvabhötÂni cÂtmani |
Íkîate yogayuktÂtmÂ sarvatra samadarïanaÉ ||29||yo mÂØ païyati sarvatra sarvaØ ca mayi païyati |
tasyÂhaØ na praàaïyÂmi sa ca me na praàaïyati ||30||
sarvabhötasthitaØ yo mÂØ bhajatyekatvamÂsthitaÉ |sarvathÂ vartamÂno'pi sa yogÍ mayi vartate ||31||

Chapter 6 197
of ignorance covered him is now dissolved. So whatever he does, he
does with the thought of God.
32. ?The worshiper, O Arjun, who perceives all things as identical
and regards happiness and sorrow as identical, is thought to
be the most accomplished yogi.?
The man who realizes that this Self is also the Self of all other
creatures, who makes no difference between himself and others, and
for whom joy and grief are the same, is the one for whom there are nolonger any distinctions nor discriminations. So, he is rightly regardedas a yogi who has attained to the highest excellence in his discipline.
But no sooner has Lord Krishn concluded his discourse on the
consequences of perfect mental restraint than Arjun expresses a freshmisgiving.
33. ?Arjun said, ?Since the mind is so restless, I cannot see, O
Madhusudan, that it can dwell steadily and long in the Way
of Knowledge which you have expounded to me asequanimity.? ??
Arjun feels helpless. With his fickle and inconstant mind, he can
foresee no prospect of a steady and constant adherence to the Path of
Knowledge which Lord Krishn has represented to him as the capacityto view all things equally.
34. ?For l find restraining the mind as difficult as restraining the
wind, because it is (equally) restless, turbulent, and mighty.??The mind is so fickle and restless (by nature it is something that
chums and agitates), obstinate, and powerful. So Arjun is apprehensive
DeelceewhecÙesve meJe&$e meceb heMÙeefle ÙeesÓpeg&ve~
megKeb Jee Ùeefo Jee og:Keb me Ùeesieer hejcees cele:~~32
Depeg&ve GJeeÛe-
ÙeesÓÙeb ÙeesiemlJeÙee Øeesòeâ: meecÙesve ceOegmetove~SlemÙeenb ve heMÙeeefce ÛeÃeuelJeeeflmLeefleb efmLejeced~~33
ÛeÃeueb efn ceve: ke=â<Ce ØeceeefLe yeueJeoddÂ{ced~
lemÙeenb efve«enb cevÙes JeeÙeesefjJe megog<keâjced~~34~~
Âtmaupamyena sarvatra samaØ païyati yo'rjuna |
sukhaØ vÂ yadi vÂ duÉkhaØ sa yogÍ paramo mataÉ||32
arjuna uvÂca-
yo'yaØ yogastvayÂ proktaÉ sÂmyena madhusödana |etasyÂhaØ na païyÂmi caácalatvÂtsthitiØ sthirÂm ||33||
caácalaØ hi manaÉ kçîàa pramÂthi balavaddçÅham |
tasyÂhaØ nigrahaØ manye vÂyoriva suduîkaram ||34||

Yatharth Geeta 198
that trying to restrain it is going to prove as futile as tying up the wind.
Checking the mind is, therefore, as well nigh impossible as checking astorm. At this Lord Krishn says,-
35. ??The Lord said, ?The mind is, O the mighty-armed,
doubtlessly fickle and hard to restrain, but it is disciplined,
O son of Kunti, by perseverance of effort and renunciation.???
Arjun is ?mighty-armed? because he is capable of great
accomplishment. The mind is indeed restless and most difficult to
subdue, but as Lord Krishn tells him, it is restrained by constant effortand giving up of all desire. Repeated endeavour to keep the mind steadilyfixed on the object to which it should be dedicated is meditation (abhyas),whereas renunciation is the sacrifice of desire for or attachment to, allseen as well as heard sense-objects, which include pleasures of theworld and also the promised joys of heaven. So, although it is difficultto curb the mind, it can be subdued by constant meditation andrenunciation. Therefore,-
36. ?It is my firm conviction that while the attainment of yog is
most difficult for a man who fails to restrain his mind, it is
easy for him who is his own master and active in theperformance of the required action.??
The achievement of yog is not really so difficult as Arjun has
assumed. It is difficult, indeed impossible, for the man with an
unrestrained mind. But it is within the reach of one who has disciplinedhis thoughts and feelings, and is enterprising. So, Arjun should notabandon his endeavour for yog just because of his fear that it issomething impossible to achieve. Yet, he responds rather despairinglyto the encouragement as we may see from his next question.
ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
DemebMeÙeb ceneyeenes cevees ogefve&«enb Ûeueced~DeYÙeemesve leg keâewvlesÙe JewjeiÙesCe Ûe ie=¢eles~~35~~
DemebÙeleelcevee Ùeesiees og<Øeehe Fefle ces ceefle:~
JeMÙeelcevee leg Ùelelee MekeäÙeesÓJeehlegcegheeÙele:~~36~~
ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-
asaØïayaØ mahÂbÂho mano durnigrahaØ calam |abhyÂsena tu kaunteya vairÂgyeàa ca gçhyate ||35||
asaØyatÂtmanÂ yogo duîprÂpa iti me matiÉ |
vaïyÂtmanÂ tu yatatÂ ïakyo'vÂptumupÂyataÉ ||36||

Chapter 6 199
37. ?Arjun said, ?What is the end, O Krishn, of the acquiescent
worshiper  whose inconstant mind has strayed from selfless
action and who has, therefore, been deprived of perception
which is the final outcome of yog????
Not all worshipers are rewarded with success in their attempt to
achieve yog, although this does not mean that they have no faith in it.
The practice of yog is often disrupted by the restless mind. But whathappens to men who wished to be yogi but did not succeed because of
their fickle minds?
38. ?Is it, O the mighty-armed, that this deluded man with no
haven to turn to is destroyed like scattered clouds, deprived
of both Self-realization and worldly pleasures??
Is this man truly like scattered patches of clouds because his
mind is divided and he is confused? If a small patch of cloud appears in
the sky, it can neither precipitate rain nor join other clouds, and within
moments the wind destroys it. Very much similar to this puny, isolatedcloud appears the passive and unpersevering man who begins with anenterprise and then discontinues his efforts. Arjun wishes to be
enlightened on what finally happens to such a man. Is he destroyed? If
so he has missed both Self-realization and worldly enjoyment. But whatis his final end?
39. ?You, O Krishn, are the most capable of fully resolving this
doubt of mine because I cannot think of anyone else who
can do it.??
The ardour of Arjun?s faith is remarkable. He is convinced that
only Lord Krishn can dispel his doubts. No one else can do it. So the
Depeg&ve GJeeÛe-
DeÙeefle:  ßeæÙeesheslees  ÙeesieeÛÛeefueleceeveme:~
DeØeehÙe Ùeesiemebefmeefæb keâeb ieefleb ke==â<Ce ieÛÚefle~~37~~
keâefÛÛeVeesYeÙeefJeYeü°efMÚVeeYeüefceJe veMÙeefle~DeØeefle?es ceneyeenes efJecet{es yeÇÿeCe: heefLe~~38~~
Slevces mebMeÙeb ke=â<Ce Úsòegcen&mÙeMes<ele:~
lJeovÙe: mebMeÙemÙeemÙe Úsòee ve ¢egheheÅeles~~39~~arjuna uvÂca-
ayatiÉ ïraddhayopeto yogÂccalitamÂnasaÉ |
aprÂpya yogasaØsiddhiØ kÂØ gatiØ kçîàa gacchati||37
kaccinnobhayavibhraîòaïchinnÂbhramiva naïyati |apratiîòho mahÂbÂho vimödho brahmaàaÉ pathi ||38||
etanme saØïayaØ kçîàa chettumarhasyaïeîataÉ |
tvadanyaÉ saØïayasyÂsya chettÂ na hyupapadyate ||39||

Yatharth Geeta 200
accomplished teacher Lord Krishn begins to resolve his devout pupil?s
misgivings.
40. ?The Lord said, ?This man, O Parth, is destroyed neither in
this world nor in the next because, my brother3,  one who
performs good deeds never comes to grief.???Arjun is addressed as ?Parth? because, as we have already seen,
he has turned his mortal body itself into a chariot to proceed to his goal.
And now Lord Krishn tells him that the man who deviates from yog,because of his mind?s fickleness, is not destroyed in this world or in thenext. This is so because a doer of good deeds, of God-related deeds, isnever damned. However, what is his destiny?
41. ?The righteous man who deviates from the path of yog
achieves celestial merits and pleasures for countless years
after which he is reborn in the house of a virtuous and nobleman (or fortunate and thriving man).?
What a paradox that the man who has fallen from yog enjoys in
the worlds of the virtuous satisfaction of the same desires for sensual
pleasure by which his restless mind was lured away from the appointedway in the mortal world! But this is God?s synoptic way of providing hima glimpse of all he wanted, after which he is reborn in the house of anoble man-a man of righteous conduct (or a man of fortune).
42. ?Or he is admitted to the family (kul) of discerning yogi and
such a birth is truly the most rare in the world.?
ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
heeLe& vewJesn veeceg$e efJeveeMemlemÙe efJeÅeles~
ve efn keâuÙeeCeke=âlkeâef§eöÏie&efleb leele ieÛÚefle~~40~~
ØeehÙe hegCÙeke=âleeb ueeskeâevegef<elJee MeeÕeleer: mecee:~MegÛeerveeb  ßeerceleeb  iesns  ÙeesieYeü°esÓefYepeeÙeles~~41~~
DeLeJee ÙeesefieveecesJe kegâues YeJeefle Oeerceleeced~
Sleefæ ogue&Yelejb ueeskesâ pevce ÙeoerÂMeced~~42~~
3. The Sanskrit equivalent used here is ?taat?, which is a term of love and
endearment.ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-
pÂrtha naiveha nÂmutra vinÂïastasya vidyate |
na hi kalyÂàakçtkaïciddurgatiØ tÂta gacchati ||40||
prÂpya puàyakçtÂØ lokÂnuîitvÂ ïÂïvatÍÉ samÂÉ |ïucÍnÂØ ïrÍmatÂØ gehe yogabhraîòo'bhijÂyate ||41||
athavÂ yoginÂmeva kule bhavati dhÍmatÂm |
etaddhi durlabhataraØ loke janma yadÍdçïam ||42||

Chapter 6 201
If the deviating Soul is not reborn in the house of a virtuous or
affluent man, he is granted a birth which provides him admission to the
family of a yogi. In the households of noble men, righteous influences
are imbibed right from childhood. But, if not reborn in such houses, he
gains admission not to the house of a yogi but to his kul as one of his
pupils. Such were men like Kabir, Tulsidas, Raidas, Valmiki and otherslike them who, though not born in the houses of noble and affluent men,
were admitted as pupils to the families of yogi. A birth in which the
merits (sanskar) inherited from a previous life are further refined byassociation with  an accomplished teacher, a realized sage, is indeed
the most rare. Being born to the yogi does not mean being born as their
physical offspring. Well might children be born to a yogi before he hadgiven up home and regard him, out of attachment, as father, but in truth
a sage has no one whom he can regard as his family. One hundred
times the concern he has for his own children is the concern he has forhis faithful and obedient pupils. They, the pupils, are his real children.
Accomplished teachers do not admit pupils who are not endowed
with the requisite sanskar. If my Revered teacher, Maharaj Ji, wereinclined to converting people into sadhus, he could have had thousandsof disenchanted men as his pupils, but he sent all the supplicants back
home, paying fare to some of them, by intimating and writing letters to
families in other cases, and sometimes by persuasion. He hadinauspicious omens if some of the contenders were adamant on being
admitted as pupils. An inner voice cautioned him that they were wanting
in the qualities that make a sadhu and so he rejected them. Smartingunder unbearable disappointment, a couple of the supplicants even
resorted to the extreme step of taking their own life. Notwithstanding all
this, Maharaj Ji would not admit pupils he did not find spiritually equippedto receive and profit by his teaching. After learning of the suicide by
one whom he had rejected, he said, ?I knew he was terribly alarmed, but
I did not know he would kill himself. Had I known this, I would havetaken him, for what greater harm could have been in that except that he
would have persisted as a sinner??  The Revered Maharaj Ji was a man
of great compassion and yet he did not accept unworthy pupils. He

Yatharth Geeta 202
admitted in all only about half a dozen pupils about whom he had been
told by his inner voice: ?Today you are going to meet one who has fallen
from yog. He has been groping about for several births. This is hisname and this is how he looks. Accept him when he comes, impart theknowledge of God to him, and support him in his journey along thepath.? So he accepted only a chosen few.
43. ?He naturally bears with him into his new birth the noble
impressions (sanskar) of yog from his previous existence,
and by dint of this he strives well for perfection (that comesfrom the realization of God).??
The merits he had earned in his previous body are spontaneously
restored to him in his new birth, by virtue of which he sets out to achieve
the ultimate excellence, that is God.
44. ?Although he is lured by objects of sense, the merits of his
previous life indeed draw him towards God and his aspiration
for yog enables him to go beyond the material rewardspromised by the Ved.??
If he is born in a noble or thriving household and is subject to the
influence of sense-objects, the traces of virtuous deeds inherited from
his previous life yet draw him to the way that leads to God, and evenwith inadequate endeavour, he is enabled to rise above the fruitsmentioned by Vedic compositions and attain to the state  of salvation.This is the way of achieving the ultimate liberation. But this cannot bewithin a single life.
le$e leb yegefæmebÙeesieb ueYeles heewJe&osefnkeâced~
Ùeleles Ûe lelees YetÙe: mebefmeæew kegâ®vevove~~43~~hetJee&YÙeemesve lesvewJe efÜÙeles ¢eJeMeesÓefhe me:~
efpe%eemegjefhe ÙeesiemÙe MeyoyeÇÿeeefleJele&les~~44~~
tatra taØ buddhisaØyogaØ labhate paurvadehikam |
yatate ca tato bhöyaÉ saØsiddhau kurunandana ||43||pörvÂbhyÂsena tenaiva hriyate hyavaïo'pi saÉ |
jijáÂsurapi yogasya ïabdabrahmÂtivartate ||44||

Chapter 6 203
45. ?The yogi, who has purified his heart and mind through
several births by intense meditation and thus rid himself of
all sins, attains to the ultimate state of realizing God.??
Only an endeavour made  over a number of lives effects this
ultimate accomplishment. The yogi who practices diligent meditation is
well rid of all kinds of impiety and then attains to the final beatitude.This is the way of attainment. Setting out on the path of yog with but afeeble effort and initiated into it when the mind is yet restless, he isadmitted to the family of an accomplished teacher and, with theundertaking of meditation in life after life, he at last arrives at the pointcalled salvation-the state in which the Soul is merged into God. LordKrishn also said before that the seed of this yog is never annihilated. Ifwe just take a couple of steps, the merits earned from them are neverdestroyed. A man of true faith can embark upon the ordained action inevery circumstance of worldly life. Whether you are a woman or a man,of whatever race or culture, if you are simply a human being, the  Geetais for you.
The Geeta is addressed to all, it is meant for all. The Geeta is
preached for householders as well as the renunciant, the educated aswell as the uneducated. It is for the whole of mankind. It is not, in anycase, exclusively for saints and sages.
A stage comes necessarily in the performance of the ordained
action when the performer has to relinquish his home. Nobody wishesto be mad or to be a leper, but one has to undergo it. Nobody wants todie, but he has to face death. Similarly, a moment comes in the stagesof sainthood when one has to become a saint or a renunciant.
The Most Revered Gurudev Maharaj Ji too faced a doubt, that he
had never thought of becoming a saint. How and why God made himSadhu forcibly by catching his neck? God revealed to him, in a divine
ØeÙelveeÅeleceevemleg Ùeesieer mebMegæefkeâefuye<e:~
Deveskeâpevcemebefmeæmlelees Ùeeefle hejeb ieefleced~~45~~
prayatnÂdyatamÂnastu yogÍ saØïuddhakilbiîaÉ |
anekajanmasaØsiddhastato yÂti parÂØ gatim ||45||

Yatharth Geeta 204
intuition, that he had been a renunciant sage, thus, relinquishing his
home for the last seven births. In the first four births, he simply wanderedhere and there in the guise of saints. During this time, he had noknowledge of the techniques of spiritual austerities or practices, yet hewas strict in observing the restraint of his senses. For the last threebirths, he had been a proficient saint, as a saint must be. Thus, theYog-practice was kindled, as God was a charioteer, who had been pilotinghim all along. In the previous birth, he was about to attain liberation, buttwo or three desires remained agitating his mind and thus, createdinquisitiveness for him to know about marriage and what the marriedlife is? And further to know and experience how people sway to and fro,after smoking ganja (an intoxicating herb), what kind of pleasure dothey get from it? Additionally, he had some physical arrogance remainingabout his aristocratic birth. For this very reason, he had to take thepresent birth. After taking this birth, he got married at the earliest andfurther received the marital experience and other observations too bythe grace of God. He, thereafter, through divine announcements, receivedperceptions about what is truth and what is untruth and was furtherdirected that his Guru Maharaj Ji (the accomplished teacher) was presentin a particular temple for his spiritual guidance. Under his direction, thespiritual austerities kindled within only four and half months. Thecontinuity of Sadhna (spiritual practice), which was left in the last birth,was again picked up from the very same point. It was just like receivinga treasure of great wealth, so suddenly, like that it had been hidden inhis own courtyard. God started directing him fully, as to where to go,what to do, and how to get elevated with spiritual practices. Within ashort time, Revered Guru Maharaj Ji became a totally accomplishedand fully enlightened sage. Moving step by step is the canon of spiritualattainment.

Chapter 6 205
46. ?Since yogi are superior to men who do penance, or men
who follow the path of discrimination, or men who desire the
fruits of action, O Kurunandan, you should be a doer ofselfless action.?
A yogi, doer of selfless action, surpasses all ascetics,  men of
knowledge as well as those of action. So Lord Krishn?s final counsel to
Arjun is that he should be a yogi. This necessitates an appraisal ofwhat all these types are.
The ASCETIC is one who practices severe austerities and
mortification of the body, mind, and senses to shape the yog which has
not yet started flowing through him like an unimpeded current.
The DOER is one who is engaged in the ordained task after
knowing it, but who applies himself to it without either making an appraisalof his own strength or a sense of dedication. He is just engaged in the
carrying out of an enterprise.
The MAN OF KNOWLEDGE, follower of the Way of Knowledge,
is engaged in the performance of the deed of yagya only after gaining a
full understanding of the process from a noble mentor, an accomplishedteacher, as well as with a clear appraisal and  judgement of his ownstrength; he holds himself responsible for both profit and loss in theundertaking.
The  YOGI, doer of selfless action, performs the same prescribed
task of meditation with a sense of total surrender to the adored one; theresponsibility for the success of his yog is borne by God and theYogeshwar. Even  when there are prospects of failure he has no fear,because the God, whom he craves for, has taken upon himself the taskof supporting and upholding him.
All the four types of action are noble as such. But the ascetic, the
man of penance, is still engaged in equipping himself for yog. The doer,
leheefmJeYÙeesÓefOekeâes Ùeesieer %eeefveYÙeesÓefhe celeesÓefOekeâ:~
keâefce&YÙe§eeefOekeâes  Ùeesieer  lemceeÅeesieer  YeJeepeg&ve~~46~~
tapasvibhyo'dhiko yogÍ jáÂnibhyo'pi mato'dhikaÉ |
karmibhyanïcÂdhiko yogÍ tasmÂdyogÍ bhavÂrjuna ||46||

Yatharth Geeta 206
the man of action, engages in action just because he knows that it has
to be undertaken. These two may fail, because they have neither asense of dedication nor a proper discernment of their assets andliabilities. But the follower of the Way of Knowledge is aware of themeans of yog and also of his own strength. He holds himself responsible
for whatever he does. And the yogi, the doer of selfless action, has
cast himself at the mercy of his adored God, and it is God who willprotect and help him. Both of these tread well on the path of spiritualsalvation. But the way on which the safety of the worshiper is lookedafter by God is the superior of the two. It is acknowledged by LordKrishn. So the yogi is the most superior of men and Arjun ought to be a
yogi. He should engage in the task of performing yog with a sense of
complete resignation.
The yogi is superior, but even better is that yogi who dwells in
God through his Self. The last words of Lord Krishn in the chapter areabout this.
47. ?Among all yogi I think that one the best who is dedicated to
me and who, abiding in the Self, always adores me.??Lord Krishn regards, among all yogi-doers of selfless action, that
one as the best who, immersed in his feeling of devotion, always adores
him. Worship is not a matter of display or exhibition. Society mayapprove of such display, but God is offended. Worship is a secret,private activity, and it is undertaken within the heart. The ascent anddescent of worship are events that belong to the innermost seats ofthought and feeling.
???????????????
Yogeshwar Krishn says at the beginning of the chapter that the
man who performs the ordained, worthwhile task is a sanyasi. The yogiis also a doer of the same action. One does not become a yogi or a
Ùeesefieveeceefhe  meJex<eeb  ceûlesveevlejelcevee~
ßeæeJeevYepeles Ùees ceeb me ces Ùegòeâlecees cele:~~47 yoginÂmapi sarveîÂØ madgatenÂntarÂtmanÂ |
ïraddhÂvÂnbhajate yo mÂØ sa me yuktatamo mataÉ ||47

Chapter 6 207
sanyasi  just by giving up lighting of fire or undertaking of action. No
one can be a sanyasi or yogi without sacrificing desires. We are not ridof will just by claiming that we do not have it. The man who wishes topossess yog should do what ought to be done, for freedom from desirescomes only by a repeated and constant undertaking of this action and
never before it. Renunciation is complete absence of desire.
The Yogeshwar has then pointed out that the Soul can be damned
as well as saved. To the man who has conquered his mind and senses,
his Self is a friend who brings the ultimate good. But to the man whohas failed to restrain his mind and senses, the same Self is an enemyand his malicious conduct causes griefs. It is, therefore, an obligation,
a sacred trust, that men act to uplift their Soul rather than degrade him.
 Lord Krishn has then described the yogi?s way of life. About the
place where yagya is performed, and the seat and posture of the
worshiper, he has said that the place should be clean and secluded,
and the seat made of fabric, deer skin or a mat of kush-grass. He hasstressed the importance of moderation, according to the nature  of theundertaken task, in endeavour, food, recreation, sleeping, and waking.He has compared the restrained mind of a yogi to the steady flame of alamp in a place where there is no wind.
Progressing even further than this, the climax-the stage of ultimate
bliss-is reached when even the perfectly restrained mind is dissolved.The eternal joy which is free from all worldly attachment and repulsionis salvation. Yog is that which unites one with this state. The yogi whoattains this state achieves an equal vision and looks equally at all beings.He looks at the Soul in others just as he looks at his own Soul. And sohe achieves the ultimate peace· So yog is essential. Wherever themind goes, it is our duty to pull it back and restrain it. Lord Krishnadmits that restraint of the mind is the most arduous, but he also assuresthat it is possible. Control of mind is achieved by practice and sacrificeof desires. Even the man whose endeavour is inadequate reaches, byconstant meditation carried out over a number of lives, the point whichis known as the ultimate state-the state of union with God. The perfect

Yatharth Geeta 208
yogi is superior to all-ascetics, men of knowledge, and those who are
just engaged in a business. So Arjun should be a yogi. With truededication to Lord Krishn, he should accomplish yog within his heartand mind. Thus, in the chapter Lord Krishn has chiefly stressed theimportance of meditation for the attainment of yog.
Thus concludes the Sixth Chapter in the Upanishad of the
Shreemadbhagwadgeeta, on the Knowledge of the Supreme
Spirit, the Science of Yog, and the Dialogue between
Lord Krishn and Arjun, entitled:
?Abhyas Yog?
or
?The Yog of Meditation?.
Thus concludes the Most Revered Paramhans Paramanand Ji?s
disciple Swami Adgadanand?s exposition of the Sixth Chapter of
the Shreemadbhagwadgeeta in ??Yatharth Geeta??, entitled:
?Abhyas Yog?.
HARI OM TAT SAT

Chapter 7 209
CHAPTER 7
IMMACULATE
KNOWLEDGE
The foregoing chapters contain almost all the main issues that
are brought up in the Geeta. There has been an elaborate presentation
of the Way of Selfless Action and the Way of Knowledge; of the natureof action and yagya as well as the mode of the performance and theirconsequence, of the meaning of yog and its outcome; and of divinemanifestation and varnasankar. The importance of waging war-of-actionfor the welfare of mankind even by men who abide in God has beenstressed at length. In the next chapters Lord Krishn will take up someother supplementary questions, in the context of subjects that havealready been touched upon, and whose resolution will be of assistancein the act of worship.
In the last verse of Chapter 6, the Yogeshwar himself laid the
basis of a question by stating that the best yogi is one whose Selfabides in God. What does abiding firmly in God mean? Many a yogiattain to God, but they feel something missing somewhere. When doesthat stage appear at which there is not even the least imperfection?When does perfect knowledge of God come about? Lord Krishn nowspeaks the state in which such knowledge is attainted to.
1. ?The Lord said, ?Listen, O Parth, to how by taking refuge in
me and practicing yog with devotion, you shall know me
beyond any doubt as the all-perfect Soul in all beings.??
The essential precondition of this complete awareness of God
should be carefully noted. If Arjun wishes to have such knowledge, he
ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
ceÙÙeemeòeâcevee: heeLe& Ùeesieb ÙegÀevceoeßeÙe:~DemebMeÙeb mece«eb ceeb ÙeLee %eemÙeefme leÛÚ=Ceg~~1ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-mayyÂsaktamanÂÉ pÂrtha yogaØ yuájanmÂdaïrayaÉ |asaØïayaØ samagraØ mÂØ yathÂ jáÂsyasi tacchçàu ||1||

Yatharth Geeta 210
%eeveb lesÓnb meefJe%eeveefceob Je#ÙeecÙeMes<ele:~
Ùep%eelJee vesn YetÙeesÓvÙep%eeleJÙeceJeefMe<Ùeles~~2~~ceveg<ÙeeCeeb men?es<eg keâef§eÅeleefle efmeæÙes~
Ùeleleeceefhe efmeæeveeb keâef§evceeb Jesefòe leòJele:~~3~~has to practice yog with devotion and by casting himself at God?s mercy.
But there are several other aspects of the problem which Lord Krishn isgoing to dwell upon, and he tells Arjun to listen carefully to him so thatall his doubts are resolved. The importance of perfect knowledge of themany glories of God is stressed again.
2. ?I shall fully teach you this knowledge as well as the all-
pervasive action that results from realization of God (vigyan),
after which there remains nothing better in the world to know.??
Lord Krishn offers to enlighten Arjun fully on the knowledge of
God along with the knowledge that is here called ?vigyan??. Knowledge
is the attainment, in the moment of accomplishment, of the substanceof immortality (amrit-tattwa) that is generated by yagya. Direct perceptionof the essence of God is knowledge. But the other knowledge, calledvigyan, is the attainment by a realized sage of the ability to actsimultaneously everywhere. It is the knowledge of how God at the sametime operates in all beings. It is the knowledge of how he makes usundertake action and of how he enables the Self to travel across theway to the identical Supreme Spirit. This way of God is vigyan. LordKrishn tells Arjun that he is going to explain this knowledge to him fully,after knowing which there will be nothing better in the world for him toknow. True knowers are much too few.
3. ?Hardly does one man among thousands strive to know me
and hardly does one among the thousands who strive for
this know my essence.?
Only rarely does a man endeavour to realize God and, among
those who strive to do so, there is scarcely a man who succeeds in
knowing his reality by direct perception. Now, where is this total reality-
jáÂnaØ te'haØ savijáÂnamidaØ vakîyÂmyaïeîataÉ |
yajjáÂtvÂ neha bhöyo'nyajjáÂtavyamavaïiîyate ||2||manuîyÂàÂØ sahasreîu kaïcidyatati siddhaye |
yatatÂmapi siddhÂnÂØ kaïcinmÂØ vetti tattvataÉ ||3||

Chapter 7 211
YetefcejeheesÓveuees JeeÙeg: Keb cevees yegefæjsJe Ûe~
Den¿ej  FleerÙeb  ces  efYeVee  Øeke=âeflej°Oee~~4~~DehejsÙeefcelemlJevÙeeb Øeke=âefleb efJeefæ ces hejeced~
peerJeYetleeb ceneyeenes ÙeÙesob OeeÙe&les peieled~~5~~
SleÅeesveerefve  Yetleeefve  meJee&CeerlÙegheOeejÙe~Denb ke=âlmvemÙe peiele: ØeYeJe: ØeueÙemleLee~~6~~the entire essence? Is it stationary at one place as a corporal body-a
lump of matter, or is it all pervading? Lord Krishn now speaks of this.
4. ?I am the creator of all nature with its eight divisions-earth,
water, fire, wind, ether, mind, intellect, and ego.??From Lord Krishn, God, has arisen nature with all its components.
This nature with its eight parts is the lower nature.
5. ?This nature, O the mighty-armed, is the lower, insensate
nature, but against it there is my conscious, living nature
which animates the whole world.??
The nature with eight parts is God?s lower nature, dull and
insensible. But, along with this, there is his conscious nature which
impregnates and gives life to the whole world. This is the individualself. But the individual soul too is ?nature?? because it is associated with
the other, lower nature.
6. ?Know that all beings arise from these two natures and that I
am both the creator and the end of whole world.??All beings spring from these animate and inanimate natures. These
are the two sources of all life. God (Krishn) is the root of the whole
universe, both its creator and destroyer. It springs from him and is alsodissolved in him. He is the spring of nature as long as it exists, but he
is also the power that dissolves nature after a sage has overcome its
limitations. But this is a matter of intuition.
Men have always been intrigued by these universal questions of
creation and destruction, which is sometimes called ?doom??. Almost allholy books of the world have attempted to explain these phenomena in
bhömirÂpo'nalo vÂyuÉ khaØ mano buddhireva ca |
ahaßkÂra itÍyaØ me bhinnÂ prakçtiraîòadhÂ ||4||apareyamitastvanyÂØ prakçtiØ viddhi me parÂm |
jÍvabhötÂØ mahÂbÂho yayedaØ dhÂryate jagat ||5||
etadyonÍni bhötÂni sarvÂàÍtyupadhÂraya |ahaØ kçtsnasya jagataÉ prabhavaÉ pralayastathÂ ||6||

Yatharth Geeta 212
one way or another. Some of them insist that the end of the world is
brought about by submersion under water, while according to others the
earth is annihilated because the sun comes too close to it and burns it.Some call the event the Day of Final Judgement, the day on which Godjudges all beings, while others explain away the idea of doom as arecurrent feature or as dependent on a specific cause. According toLord Krishn, however, nature is without beginning and end. Changesthere have been, but it has never been completely destroyed.
According to Indian mythology, Manu experienced a doom in which
eleven sages had sailed, by tying their boat to the fin of a fish, to atowering peak of the Himalayas and found shelter there.
1 In the sacred
composition called the Bhagwat, which is contemporaneous with LordKrishn-God coming down to earth for his pleasure-and dealing with hislife and precepts - the sage Mrikandu?s son Markandeya Ji has renderedan account of the doom he claims to have seen with his own ?eyes?. Helived on the north of the Himalayas, on the bank of the PushpbhadraRiver.
According to Chapter 8 and 9 of the twelfth section of Shreemad
Bhagwat, the great sage Shaunak and some others told Sut Ji (a pupilof Vyas) the Markandeya Ji had a vision of Balmukund (infant Vishnu)on a Banyan-leaf. But the difficulty was that he belonged to their lineageand was born only sometime before them; and it was a fact that theearth was never submerged and destroyed after his birth. With all this,how was it possible that he had beheld destruction of the earth? Whatkind of deluge was it?
Sut Ji told them that, pleased with his prayers, God had manifested
himself to Markandeya Ji, who had then expressed his wish to seeGod?s maya, driven by which the Soul has to wander through endlessbirths. God had granted his wish and one day, when the sage was
1. The reference here is to Matsya-Avtar, the first of the ten incarnations of Supreme.
During the reign of the Manu, the whole earth, which had become corrupt, was
swept away by a flood, and all living beings perished except the pious Manu and
the eleven sages who were saved by Supreme in the form of a huge fish. Theentire episode is, of course, symbolic.

Chapter 7 213
ceòe: hejlejb veevÙeeflkeâefÃeoefmle OeveÀeÙe~
ceefÙe meJe&efceob Øeesleb met$es ceefCeieCee FJe~~7~~sitting absorbed in contemplation, he saw towering, furious waves of
the sea hurtling on to him from all sides. Terrible fishes leapt from thewaves. He scurried here and there to save himself. The sky, the sun,the moon, heaven itself, and all the constellations were drowned in theflood. In the meantime he saw a Banyan tree with an infant on one of itsleaves. As the child breathed in, Markandeya Ji was drawn inside himby the inrushing air, and there he discovered his hermitage along withthe solar system and the whole universe alive and intact. Soon after,he was cast out with an exhalation. When his eyes opened at last,Markandey Ji found himself safe on his seat in his hermitage. Sowhatever he had seen was but a dream- a vision.
It is evident that the sage had this divine, transcendental vision-
this intuitive experience - only after worship spread over years beyondreckoning. It was a perception by his Soul; everything outside was thesame as before. So doom, too, is an event that is revealed by Godwithin the heart of a yogi. When at the completion of the process ofworship, worldly influences cease to be and only God remains in theyogi?s mind-that is doom. This dissolution is not an externalphenomenon. Final doom is the inexpressible state of the total identityof Soul with God while the body yet is. This is something that can beexperienced through action alone. Whether it is you or me, we are victimsof delusion if we judge by the mind alone. This is what we are told now.
7. ?There is, O Dhananjay, not even one object other than me,
and the whole world is linked up with me like the pearls of a
necklace.?
There is absolutely nothing else except God and the whole world
is tied up with him. But it is possible to know this only when, as it was
said in the first verse of the chapter, one engages in yog with totalresignation to God, and never before this. Participation in yog is anindispensable necessity.
mattaÉ parataraØ nÂnyatkiácidasti dhanaájaya |
mayi sarvamidaØ protaØ sutre maàigaàÂ iva ||7||

Yatharth Geeta 214
jmeesÓncehmeg keâewvlesÙe ØeYeeefmce MeefMemetÙe&Ùees:~
ØeCeJe: meJe&Jesos<eg Meyo: Kes heew®<eb ve==<eg~~8~~hegCÙees ievOe: he=efLeJÙeeb Ûe lespe§eeefmce efJeYeeJemeew~
peerJeveb  meJe&Yetles<eg  lehe§eeefmce  leheefmJe<eg~~9~~
yeerpeb ceeb meJe&Yetleeveeb efJeefæ heeLe& meveeleveced~yegefæye&gefæceleeceefmce lespemlespeefmJeveecenced~~10~~
yeueb yeueJeleeb Ûeenb keâecejeieefJeJeefpe&leced~
Oecee&efJe®æes Yetles<eg keâeceesÓefmce Yejle<e&Ye~~11~~8. ?O Arjun, I am that which makes water liquescent, the radiance
in the sun and the moon, the sacred syllable OM
2, the word?s
echo (Shabd)3 in the ether, and I am also the manliness in
men.?
God is all these and all knowledge; and the whole wisdom of the
Ved has been breathed forth from him. He is also much more.9. ?I am the fragrance in the earth, the flame in fire, the Soul
that animates all beings, and the penance of ascetics.?
God pervades the whole universe, the earth, the fire, all creatures
and even the severe spiritual austerities that are practiced by ascetics.
He dwells in every atom.
10. ?Since I am also the intellect in wise men and the magnificence
of men of glory, know you, O Arjun, that I am the eternal
fountainhead of all beings.?
God is the seed from which all creatures are born. Moreover-
11. ?I am, O the best of Bharat, the selfless power of the strong
and I, too, am the aspiration for realization in all beings that
is never hostile to God.?
God is the righteous aspiration of the mighty and also their strength
which is free from all desire. Doesn?t everyone in the world wish to be
2. The syllable OM, symbol of God.
3. Knowledge of Self and Supreme Spirit that is beyond the reach or power of words.
Voice of God with the help of which sages practice meditation.raso'hamapsu kaunteya prabhÂsmi ïaïisöryayoÉ |
praàavaÉ sarvavedeîu ïabdaÉ khe pauruîaØ nçîu||8puàyo gandhaÉ pçthivyÂØ ca tejaïcÂsmi vibhÂvasau|
jÍvanaØ sarvabhöteîu tapaïcÂsmi tapasviîu ||9||
bÍjaØ mÂØ sarvabhötÂnÂØ viddhi pÂrtha sanÂtanam|buddhirbuddhimatÂmasmi tejastejasvinÂmaham ||10||
balaØ balavatÂØ cÂhaØ kÂmarÂgavivarjitam |
dharmÂviruddho bhöteîu kÂmo'smi bharatarîabha||11

Chapter 7 215
Ùes ÛewJe meeefòJekeâe YeeJee jepemeemleecemee§e Ùes~
ceòe SJesefle leeefvJeefæ ve lJenb les<eg les ceefÙe~~12ef$eefYeieg&CeceÙewYee&JewjsefYe:  meJe&efceob  peieled~
ceesefnleb veeefYepeeveeefle ceecesYÙe: hejceJÙeÙeced~~13strong? Some endeavour to achieve it through physical exercise and
some through the amassing of nuclear weapons. But Lord Krishn affirms
that he is the strength that is beyond all desire and attachment. This is
true strength. He is also in all beings the aspiration that is propitious fordharm. God alone is the real dharm. The immortal Soul that holds all
within himself is dharm. And God is also that craving which is not inimical
to dharm. Lord Krishn had prompted Arjun earlier to aspire to therealization of God. All desires are forbidden, but yearning for the
attainment of God is essential because we cannot be inclined to worshipin its absence. This hunger for God is also a gift from Lord Krishn.
12. ?And know that although all the properties of nature (tamas,
rajas and sattwa) have arisen from me, they neither dwell in
me nor do I dwell in them?
All the properties of nature, ignorance, passion and virtue are
born from God. Yet, however, he is not in them and they are not in him;
he is not absorbed in them and they cannot enter into him because heis unattached to and unsullied by them. He has to gain nothing fromnature or its properties, and so they cannot taint him.
Despite this, however, as the body?s hunger and thirst are caused
by the Soul and yet the Soul is wholly unconcerned with food and water,even so although nature arises from God, he is untouched by itsproperties and activities.
13. ?Since the whole world is deluded by feelings resulting from
the operation of the three properties, it is unaware of my
imperishable essence that is beyond them.?
Blinded by feelings associated with the operation of tamas, rajas
and sattwa, men fail to perceive the indestructible and the one reality
ye caiva sÂttvikÂ bhÂvÂ rÂjasÂstÂmasÂïca ye |
matta eveti tÂnviddhi na tvahaØ teîu te mayi ||12||tribhirguàamayairbhÂvairebhiÉ sarvamidaØ jagat |
mohitaØ nÂbhijÂnÂti mÂmebhyaÉ paramavyayam ||13||

Yatharth Geeta 216
owJeer ¢ess<ee iegCeceÙeer cece ceeÙee ogjlÙeÙee~
ceecesJe Ùes ØeheÅevles ceeÙeecesleeb lejefvle les~~14~~
ve ceeb og<ke=âeflevees cet{e: ØeheÅevles vejeOecee:~
ceeÙeÙeeheùle%eevee Deemegjb YeeJeceeefßelee:~~15~~ÛelegefJe&Oee Yepevles ceeb pevee: megke=âefleveesÓpeg&ve~
Deeleex efpe%eemegjLee&Leea %eeveer Ûe Yejle<e&Ye~~16~~that is God-quite beyond the properties of nature. So he cannot be
known if there is even the slightest trace of these properties. So longas these properties envelop the worshiper?s mind, his journey isincomplete. He has still to go along, he is still on the way.
14. ?This divine three-propertied yog-maya of mine is most
difficult to overcome, but they who seek refuge in me get
over the illusion and achieve salvation.?
God?s celestial maya, the power from which the empirical universe
is evolved, is most difficult to comprehend, but they who are always
engaged in the worship of God navigate safely across it. The maya iscalled divine, but that does not mean that we should start burning incensesticks as a reverent offering to it. It should never be forgotten that it issomething that we have to vanquish and get across.
15. ?The ignorant and unwise are the most despicable of men
and doers of wickedness, because deluded by maya and
having demoniacal qualities they do not worship me.?
They who contemplate and adore God know this. And yet there
are many others who do not worship. Men with evil propensities whose
discrimination has been ravished by maya, the meanest amongstmankind who are immersed in lust and anger, do not worship God. Inthe following verse Lord Krishn turns to worshipers.
16. ?Four kinds of devotees, O the best of Bharat, worship me:
the ones who desire material rewards, the distressed, ones
who aspire to know me, and those men of knowledge.?
daivÍ hyeîÂ guàamayÍ mama mÂyÂ duratyayÂ |
mÂmeva ye prapadyante mÂyÂmetÂØ taranti te ||14||
na mÂØ duîkçtino möÅhÂÉ prapadyante narÂdhamÂÉ |
mÂyayÂpahçtajáÂnÂ ÂsuraØ bhÂvamÂïritÂÉ ||15||caturvidhÂ bhajante mÂØ janÂÉ sukçtino'rjuna |
Ârto jijáÂsurarthÂrthÍ jáÂnÍ ca bharatarîabha ||16||

Chapter 7 217
les<eeb %eeveer efvelÙeÙegòeâ SkeâYeefòeâefJe&efMe<Ùeles~
efØeÙees efn %eeefveveesÓlÙeLe&cenb me Ûe cece efØeÙe:~~17The four kinds cover all worshipers. There are first those who do
the appointed task because doing it will bring good fortune, they are the
doers of selfish action. There are, then, men who devote themselves toGod because they wish to be liberated from grief. Yet other devoteeslong to have a direct perception of God. And, lastly, there are the wisemen, the realized sages, who have attained to the stage of reaching thesupreme goal.
Material wealth is the means that sustains the body as well as all
its relations. So riches and satisfaction of desires are first provided byGod. Lord Krishn says that he is the provider of means, but his wordssuggest more than this. The really lasting  wealth is made up of spiritualacquisition. This is the real treasure.
While a worshiper is busy toiling for material gains, God prompts
him on towards spiritual achievements, because he knows that spiritualmerits are man?s real wealth and that his worshiper will not always becontented with material acquisitions alone. So he also begins to bestowspiritual riches on him. Granting profit in the mortal world and support inthe next world are both God?s burden. Under no circumstances does heleave the worshiper unrecompensed.
There are, then, worshipers with grief-laden hearts. There are also
among worshipers of God men who wish to know him fully. Men whohave attained knowledge of God by perception also worship him. Thus,according to Lord Krishn, four kinds of men are his devoted adorers.But of all of them the worshipers with the wisdom that comes fromperception is the most superior. The significant point is, however, thatthis sagacious man is a devotee, too. Among all these kinds,-
17. ?To the wise man of knowledge who worships me, the one
God, with steady love and devotion, I am the dearest and so
is he to me.?
teîÂØ jáÂnÍ nityayukta ekabhaktirviïiîyate |
priyo hi jáÂnino'tyarthamahaØ sa ca mama priyaÉ 17

Yatharth Geeta 218
Goeje: meJe& SJewles %eeveer lJeelcewJe ces celeced~
DeeefmLele: me efn Ùegòeâelcee ceecesJeevegòeceeb ieefleced~~18yentveeb pevceveecevles %eeveJeevceeb ØeheÅeles~
JeemegosJe: meJe&efceefle me cenelcee megogue&Ye:~~19Of all worshipers, they love God most who have been enlightened
by perception and who therefore abide in him with single-minded devotion.
This feeling is reciprocated, for God also loves this worshiper morethan anyone else. This wise man corresponds to God; and-
18. ?Although they are all generous because they worship me
with devotion, the wise man of realization is- I believe-
identical with me, his supreme goal.?
All the four kinds of worshipers are portrayed as generous. But
what charity have they shown? Does God benefit by a worshiper?s
devotion? Do they give him something he does not have? Obviously,the answer to all these questions is a clear, ?no?. It is really God alonewho is magnanimous. He is ever ready to save Souls from degradation.So generosity is also a quality of those who wish that their Souls arenot debased. We have thus a case here of mutual charity. They are all,both God and his worshipers, generous. But, according to Lord Krishn,the worshiper endowed with knowledge is identical with him becausethat discriminating worshiper dwells in him with the faith that he is hissublime goal. In other words, he is God-he is within him. There is noseparation between God and him. The same idea is re-emphasized inthe next verse:
19. ?The great Soul is indeed most rare who worships me with
the knowledge, acquired at the end of many births, that I
(Vasudev) am the only reality.?
The enlightened sage, who is at last blessed with perception after
meditating for many births, undertakes divine adoration with the
conviction that Lord Krishn is everything. Such a sage is the most rare.He does not worship any external entity called Vasudev, but rather
udÂrÂÉ sarva evaite jáÂnÍ tvÂtmaiva me matam |
ÂsthitaÉ sa hi yuktÂtmÂ mÂmevÂnuttamÂØ gatim||18bahönÂØ janmanÂmante jáÂnavÂnmÂØ prapadyate|
vÂsudevaÉ sarvamiti sa mahÂtmÂ sudurlabhaÉ ||19

Chapter 7 219
keâecewmlewmlewù&le%eevee:  ØeheÅevlesÓvÙeosJelee:~
leb leb efveÙececeemLeeÙe Øeke=âlÙee efveÙelee: mJeÙee~~20
Ùees Ùees Ùeeb Ùeeb levegb Yeòeâ: ßeæÙeeefÛe&legefceÛÚefle~
lemÙe lemÙeeÛeueeb ßeæeb leecesJe efJeoOeecÙenced~~21feels the presence of God within his own Self. This is the man with
discrimination whom Lord Krishn also describes as a seer. Only suchrealized sages can instruct the human society that is outside them.These seers, who have directly perceived reality, are according to LordKrishn the most rare. So all men should worship God because he is thegiver of spiritual glory as well as pleasure. Yet people do not worshiphim. The paradox is accounted for in the following verse.
20. ?Driven by the properties of their nature, they who fall from
knowledge desire worldly pleasures and, in imitation of the
prevailing customs, worship other gods instead of the onesingle God.?
Bereft of discernment because of their craving for sensual
pleasures, ignorant men are unable to see that the enlightened sage,
the accomplished teacher and God alone have real worth. So, urged bytheir nature or rather by the merits (sanskar) they have earned andstored through many lives, they resort to current creed and practices,and devote themselves to the worship of other gods. Here for first timethe Geeta makes mention of other gods.
21. ?It is I who bestow steadiness on the faith of covetous
worshipers according to the nature of the gods they
worship.?
It is God who imparts the quality of unflinching firmness to the
devotion of worshipers who adore other gods because they wish for
material rewards. It is God who makes the faith in other gods steady.Had gods really existed, this task would have been accomplished bythese entities themselves. But since they are only a myth, it is Godwho has to render the faith of worshipers in them firm and strong.
kÂmaistaistairhçtajáÂnÂÉ prapadyante'nyadevatÂÉ |
taØ taØ niyamamÂsthÂya prakçtyÂ niyatÂÉ svayÂ ||20
yo yo yÂØ yÂØ tanuØ bhaktaÉ ïraddhayÂrcitumicchati|
tasya tasyÂcalÂØ ïraddhÂØ tÂmeva vidadhÂmyaham ||21

Yatharth Geeta 220
me  leÙee  ßeæÙee  ÙegòeâmlemÙeejeOeveceernles~
ueYeles Ûe lele: keâeceevceÙewJe efJeefnleeefvn leeved~~22DevleJeòeg Heâueb les<eeb leÆJelÙeuhecesOemeeced~
osJeevosJeÙepees Ùeeefvle ceÆòeâe Ùeeefvle ceeceefhe~~2322. ?Possessing this strengthened faith, the worshiper devotes
himself to his chosen deity with devotion and, through this
undoubtedly achieves the enjoyment of desired pleasureswhich are also appointed by my laws.?
Possessed of faith that is propped up by God, the desire-ridden
worshiper devotes himself with renewed vigour to the adoration of some
unworthy gods, but surprisingly he too is rewarded with the desiredsatisfaction. But this satisfaction is also a gift from God. So God isalso the bestower of enjoyment of worldly pleasures. Mean pleasurerather than divine bliss is the reward for those who worship other godsfor satisfaction of their desires. But in a way they are rewarded. Sothere seems apparently nothing wrong with this form of worship. However,this is what Lord Krishn has to say on the question:
23. ?But the rewards of these deluded men are finite because
they only attain to the gods they worship, whereas the man
who worships me howsoever he does it - realizes me.?
The prizes won by these ignorant men are destructible. They are
impermanent because they are worldly pleasures which have a beginning
and an end.
The pleasures that are with us today slip away from us tomorrow.
Men who worship other gods acquire powers that are themselvesperishable. The whole world, from the level of divinities to that of thelowest creatures, is mutable and subject to death. On the contrary, theman who worships God attains to him and so to the ineffable peace thatdescends on the Soul after he is united with God.
Yogeshwar Krishn had exhorted Arjun earlier to foster gods, that
is pious impulses, through the observance of yagya. Good fortune
sa tayÂ ïraddhayÂ yuktastasyÂrÂdhanamÍhate |
labhate ca tataÉ kÂmÂnmayaiva vihitÂnhi tÂn ||22||antavattu phalaØ teîÂØ tadbhavatyalpamedhasÂm|
devÂndevayajo yÂnti madbhaktÂ yÂnti mÂmapi ||23||

Chapter 7 221
DeJÙeòebâ JÙeefòeâceeheVeb cevÙevles ceeceyegæÙe:~
hejb  YeeJecepeevevlees  ceceeJÙeÙecevegòececed~~24~~accrues from an increases and strengthening of these riches. And
ultimately, with gradual progress, there is the attainment of perceptionand supreme peace. In this context ?gods? represent forces of piety bywhich the divinity of God is secured. These godly impulses that have tobe fostered are the means for salvation and their twenty-six attributesare enumerated in Chapter-16.
The righteousness which garners the sanctity of God within the
worshiper's heart is named ?god?. It was at the outset something internal,but with the passage of time people began to visualize these qualitiesin palpable forms. So idols were made, the karmkand was devised, andtruth was lost sight of. Lord Krishn has attempted to refute themisconception about gods and goddesses in verses 20-23 of the presentchapter. Naming other gods for the first time here in the Geeta, he hasemphatically said that they do not exist. Whenever faith inclines, it ishe who supports it and makes it firm, and it is also he who providesrewards for this faith. But these rewards are finite and perishable. Fruitsare destroyed, gods are destroyed, and worshipers of these god arealso destroyed. So only the ignorant who are lacking in discriminationworship other gods. Later Lord Krishn will even go to the extent ofaffirming that such worship is an impiety. (Geeta, 9/23).
24. ?Wanting in wisdom and oblivious of the reality that I am
immaculate and beyond the friend and senses, men regard
my manifestation as a physical incarnation.?
There is nothing like gods and the rewards, too their worship are
ephemeral. All this notwithstanding, all men are not devoted to God.
This is so because men who are bereft of discernment are, as we haveseen in the last verse, only inadequately aware of God?s perfection andmagnificence. It is for this reasons that they deem the unmanifest Godas assuming a human form. In other words Lord Krishn was a yogi in
avyaktaØ vyaktimÂpannaØ manyante mÂmabuddhayaÉ|
paraØ bhÂvamajÂnanto mamÂvyayamanuttamam ||24||

Yatharth Geeta 222
veenb  ØekeâeMe:  meJe&mÙe  ÙeesieceeÙeemeceeJe=le:~
cet{esÓÙeb veeefYepeeveeefle ueeskeâes ceecepeceJÙeÙeced~~25the body of a man, verily a Yogeshwar, a Lord of Yog. The one who is
a yogi himself and has the ability to impart yog to others is calledYogeshwar, an accomplished teacher. Adopting the right form of worship,and with gradual refinement, sages also come to abide in that state.Although wearing the apparel of a human body, they at last abide in theformless, unmanifest God. But ignorant men yet regard them as ordinaryhuman beings. How can they be God, these men think, when they wereborn just like them? They are hardly to blame for this, for their  deludedminds, wherever they look, see only the external form. Yogeshwar Krishnnow explains why they are unable to see the Spirit embodied within thephysical body.
25. ?Hidden behind my yog-maya, I am not perceived by all and
this ignorant man does not know me, the birthless and
immutable God.?
For an ordinary man, maya, the power by which God evolves the
physical universe, is like a thick screen behind which God is completely
hidden. Beyond this yog-maya, or the practice of yog, there is alsoanother curtain. It is only by a constant and long practice of yog thatthe worshiper reaches the culminating point of yog where the hiddenGod is perceived. Yogeshwar Kirshn says that he is hidden by his yog-maya and only they who have secured yog can know him. Since he isnot manifest to all, the ignorant and unwise man does not know him thebirthless (who is not going to be born again), eternal (who cannot bedestroyed), and unmanifest (who is not going to be manifest again).Arjun initially regarded Lord Krishn as just another mortal. But after heis enlightened and his vision is enlarged, he begins to plead and beg.By and large it is only too true that we are no better than blind men inthe matter of recognizing the unmanifest Soul of sages and great men.
nÂhaØ prakÂïaÉ sarvasya yogamÂyÂsamÂvçtaÉ |
möÅho'yaØ nÂbhijÂnÂti loko mÂmajamavyayam||25

Chapter 7 223
Jesoenb  meceleerleeefve  Jele&ceeveeefve  Ûeepeg&ve~
YeefJe<ÙeeefCe Ûe Yetleeefve ceeb leg Jeso ve keâ§eve~~26
FÛÚeÉs<emeceglLesve  ÉvÉceesnsve  Yeejle~meJe&Yetleeefve mecceesnb meiex Ùeeefvle hejvlehe~~27Ùes<eeb lJevleieleb heeheb peveeveeb hegCÙekeâce&Ceeced~
les ÉvÉceesnefveceg&òeâe Yepevles ceeb Â{?elee:~~2826. ?I know, O Arjun, all beings that have been (or will be) in the
past, present, and future, but no one knows me (without true
devotion).?
Why it is so is explained in the next verse:
27. ?All beings in the world fall into ignorance, O Bharat, because
of the contradictions of attachment and repugnance, and of
happiness and sorrow.?
All men are victims of delusion because of the endless dualities
of material nature and so fail to know god (Krishn). Does it imply that no
one will know him? In Lord Krishn?s words :
28. ?But they who worship me in every way are selflessly engaged
in good deeds, free from sin and delusion, arising from the
conflicts of attachment and repulsion, and of firm intent.?
Freed from evil and conflicting passions, the doers of virtuous
action which brings; the worldly life-of birth and death-to a final end, and
which has been variously described as worthy action, ordained action,and the deed of yagya, worship and adore him to achieve redemption.
Here it is evident beyond any doubt that the way to God-realization
is according to Lord Krishn only through an accomplished teacher. Onewho performs the ordained task under the guidance of such a mentoracquires mastery of spiritual capacity as well as perfect action. This isalso further illustrated in the following verses.
vedÂhaØ samatÍtÂni vartamÂnÂni cÂrjuna |
bhaviîyÂài ca bhötÂni mÂØ tu veda na kaïcana ||26||
icchÂdveîasamutthena dvandvamohena bhÂrata |
sarvabhötÂni sammohaØ sarge yÂnti parantapa ||27||yeîÂØ tvantagataØ pÂpaØ janÂnÂØ puàyakarmaàÂm|
te dvandvamohanirmuktÂ bhajante mÂØ dçÅhavratÂÉ28

Yatharth Geeta 224
29. ?Only they who strive for liberation from the cycle of birth
and death by finding shelter under me succeed in knowing
God, spiritual wisdom and all action.?
Knowledge of God, of the kinship of the individual and Universal
Soul, and of all actions prepares a man spiritually to take refuge in God
and seek the ultimate liberation. Along with this-
30. ?They who know me as the presiding Spirit in all beings
(adhibhut) and gods (adhidaiv), and in yagya (adhiyagya),
and whose minds are fixed on me, know me at the end.?
Men who know Lord Krishn also know the Supreme Spirit that
animates all beings, all gods and yagya. They, whose minds are
absorbed in him, know the God in Lord Krishn, dwell in him and attain tohim forever. In verses 26-27, Lord Krishn has said that men do notknow him because they are ignorant. But they who aspire to be rid ofdelusion know him along with God, the embodiment of perfection, theidentity between him and the individual Soul as well as the materialuniverse, and perfect action in brief, the immaculate nature of the Spiritthat dwells in all beings, gods and yagya. The source of all this is aseer: one who has realized the truth. So it is not that this awareness isimpossible to acquire. But there is an appointed way by following whichalone can a man hope to possess this perfect knowledge.
???????????????
Yogeshwar Krishn has said in this chapter that they who surrender
themselves to him and practice selfless action know him perfectly. Buthardly one among thousands endeavours to know him and hardly oneamong those who try really knows him. The worshiper who has had a
pejecejCecees#eeÙe  ceeceeefßelÙe  Ùeleefvle  Ùes~
les yeÇÿe leefÉog: ke=âlmveceOÙeelceb keâce& ÛeeefKeueced~~29meeefOeYetleeefOeowJeb ceeb meeefOeÙe%eb Ûe Ùes efJeog:~
ØeÙeeCekeâeuesÓefhe Ûe ceeb les efJeogÙe&gòeâÛesleme:~~30 jarÂmaraàamokîÂya mÂmÂïritya yatanti ye |
te brahma tadviduÉ kçtsnamadhyÂtmaØ karma cÂkhilam||29sÂdhibhötÂdhidaivaØ mÂØ sÂdhiyajáaØ ca ye viduÉ |
prayÂàakÂle'pi ca mÂØ te viduryuktacetasaÉ ||30||

Chapter 7 225
direct perception of him knows him not as a corporal body- a clod of
earth, but as the all-pervading Spirit. The eightfold nature is his lower,insensate nature, but infusing its depths there is the Spirit which is hisconscious nature. All beings arise from the association of these twonatures. Lord Krishn is the root of all creation. It is he who has madeboth the radiance of light and the valour of men. He is the selflessmanliness of the strong and he, too, is the sacred aspiration of hisdevotees. All desires are forbidden, but Arjun is told to cherish thedesire to realize him. The emergence of this one worthwhile craving isalso a blessing from him. The desire to be united with God is the onlydesire that is in tune with the essence of dharm.
Lord Krishn has said that he is beyond the three properties of
nature and that he is abiding in the Supreme State by unifying withunmanifest God. But the desire-ridden men with deluded minds worshipother gods instead of Lord Krishn directly. In fact, such gods do notexist. Stone, water and tree, which the ignorant wish to continue toworship, yet, Lord Krishn himself affirms their faith in such. But withhidden presence he rewards the desired fruits because there exist nogods in any of these nor any material awards.
Lord Krishn has further said that ignorant and unwise men do not
worship him because, hidden behind his yog-maya, he appears to themas just an ordinary mortal. It is only by continuous meditation that seekerscan pierce through the pall of maya and know the unmanifest essenceof his physical incarnation. He cannot be known without this.
He has four kinds of devotees, coveters of rewards, the
distressed, men who desire to know him and men of knowledge. Thewise sage, who is at last blessed with perception after practicingmeditation over the span of many births, becomes one with Lord Krishn.In other words, it is only contemplation through a number of lives thatGod can be attained. But men who are afflicted with attachment andaversion can never know him. On the other hand, they who perform theordained action (which is worship) in a state of freedom from the delusionsof worldly attraction and repulsion, and who are diligently engaged in

Yatharth Geeta 226
contemplation to be liberated from mortality, know him perfectly. They
know him along with the all- pervasive God, perfect action, adhyatm,adhidaiv, and yagya.
They dwell in him and remember him at the end, so that they
never lose his memory thereafter. The chapter may thus be summedup as a discourse on the perfect knowledge of God, or what we maycall ?immaculate knowledge.?
Thus concludes the Seventh Chapter, in the Upanishad of
Shreemadbhagwadgeeta, on the Knowledge of the Supreme
Spirit, the Discipline of Yog, and the Dialogue between Lord
Krishn and Arjun, entitled:
?Samagr Gyan??,
or
?Immaculate Knowledge??.
Thus concludes the Most Revered Paramhans Paramanand Ji?s
disciple Swami Adgadanand?s exposition of the Seventh Chapter
of the Shreemadbhagwadgeeta in ??Yatharth Geeta??, entitled:
?Samagr Gyan??.
HARI OM TAT SAT

Chapter 8 227
CHAPTER 8
YOG WITH
THE IMPERISHABLE GOD
At the end of Chapter 7, Lord Krishn said that yogi who do pious
deeds are released from all sin and know the all-pervading God. So
action is something that brings knowledge of the Supreme Spirit. Theywho do it know him (Lord Krishn) along with the omnipresent God- theadhidaiv, adhibhoot, adhiyagya, perfect action and Adhyatm
1. So action
is that which apprises us of them. Men who know them are aware, atthe end, of Lord Krishn alone, and this knowledge is never blotted out.
Repeating Lord Krishn?s own words Arjun raises a question:
1. ?Arjun said, Enlighten me, O Supreme Being, on the nature
of Brahm, adhyatm, action, adhibhoot and adhidaiv.??
The words adhyatm, action, adhibhoot and adhidaiv are all
mysteries to Arjun and he wishes to be enlightened on them.2. ?Who is adhiyagya, O Madhusudan, and how is he enshrined
in the body; and how does the man with a restrained mind
know you at the end???
Who is a adhiyagya and how is he within the body? It is evident
that the doer of yagya is some Soul who is based in a human body.
And, at last, how does a man with a fully controlled mind know
Lord Krishn at the end? So there are seven questions in all and Lord
Krishn proceeds to answer them in that order.
Depeg&ve GJeeÛe-
efkebâ leodddyeÇÿe efkeâceOÙeelceb efkebâ keâce& heg®<eesòece~
DeefOeYetleb Ûe efkebâ ØeesòeâceefOeowJeb efkeâcegÛÙeles~~1~~DeefOeÙe%e:  keâLeb  keâesÓ$e  osnsÓefmcevceOegmetove~
ØeÙeeCekeâeues Ûe keâLeb %esÙeesÓefme efveÙeleelceefYe:~~2
1. See verses 29-30 and their exposition in Chapter 7.arjuna uvÂca-kiØ tadbrahma kimadhyÂtmaØ kiØ karma puruîottama|
adhibhötaØ ca kiØ proktamadhidaivaØ kimucyate||1adhiyajáaÉ kathaØ ko'tra dehe'sminmadhusudana |
prayÂàakÂle ca kathaØ jáeyo'si niyatÂtmabhiÉ ||2||

Yatharth Geeta 228
ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
De#ejb yeÇÿe hejceb mJeYeeJeesÓOÙeelcecegÛÙeles~YetleYeeJeesÆJekeâjes efJemeie&: keâce&meef_%ele:~~3~~
DeefOeYetleb #ejes YeeJe: heg®<e§eeefOeowJeleced~
DeefOeÙe%eesÓncesJee$e  osns  osnYe=leeb  Jej~~4~~3. ?The Lord said, ?The one who is imperishable is the Supreme
Spirit (Brahm); abiding in a body he is adhyatm; and the
cessation of properties in beings which produce somethingor the other is action.??
The one who is indestructible, who never dies, is the Supreme
Spirit. Steady devotion to the Self-dominance of the Soul-is adhyatm.
Before this stage everyone is ruled by maya, but when a man dwellsfirmly in God and so in his own Self, he is infused with the sense ofsupremacy of his Self. This is the culmination of adhyatm. The ceasing-the discontinuance-of the will of beings which  results in the creation ofboth good and evil is, on the other hand, the crowning point of action.This is the perfect action which Lord Krishn had spoken of earlier asknown to yogi. Action is now complete and henceforth there is no furtherneed of it. Action is perfected when the desires of beings which createsanskar that are propitious as well as unpropitious are stilled. Beyondthis there is not further need of action. So true action is that whichbrings an end to desires. Such action, therefore, means worship andcontemplation that are inherent in yagya.
4. ?Adhibhoot is all that is subject to birth and death; the
Supreme Spirit is adhidaiv, and O the unparalleled among
men (Arjun), I (Vasudev) am the adhiyagya in the body.??
Until the state of immortality is achieved, all the transient
destructible desires are adhibhoot or in other words spheres of beings.
They are the source of the origin of beings. And the Supreme Spirit whois beyond nature is adhidaiv, the creator of all gods, that is righteousimpulses- the divine treasure that is finally dissolved in him. Vasudev-Krishn-is adhiyagya in the human body, the performer of all yagya.Thus God himself, dwelling as the unmanifest Soul in the body, is
ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-
akîaraØ brahma paramaØ svabhÂvo'dhyÂtmamucyate |bhötabhÂvodbhavakaro visargaÉ karmasaØjáitaÉ ||3||
adhibhötaØ kîaro bhÂvaÉ puruîaïcÂdhidaivatam |
adhiyajáo'hamevÂtra dehe dehabhçtÂØ vara ||4||

Chapter 8 229
Devlekeâeues Ûe ceecesJe mcejvcegkeälJee keâuesJejced~
Ùe: ØeÙeeefle me ceÆeJeb Ùeeefle veemlÙe$e mebMeÙe:~~5~~adhiyagya. Lord Krishn was a yogi, the enjoyer of all oblations. And all
yagya are at last absorbed in him. That is the moment of realization ofthe Supreme Soul. Six of Arjun?s questions have now been answered.At last, Lord Krishn takes up the question of how he is known at the endand never forgotten thereafter.
5. ?The man who departs from the body remembering me
doubtlessly attains to me.??That accounts for Lord Krishn?s assertion that the man who finally,
that is when he has perfect control over his mind and when even this
mind is dissolved, severs his relationship with the body and departsfrom it with remembrance of him, surely achieves total oneness withhim.
Death of the body is not the final end, for the succession of bodies
continues even after death. It is only when the last crust of earnedmerits or demerits (sanskar) has disintegrated, and so also the restrainedmind along with it, that the final end comes, and after that the Souldoes not have to assume a new body. But this is a process of actionand it cannot be rendered comprehensible by just words. As long as thetransfer from one body to another, like a change of clothes, persists,there is no real end of the physical person. But even while the body ityet alive, with control of the mind and dissolution of the restrained minditself, physical relationships are sundered. If this state were possibleafter the event of death, even Lord Krishn could not be perfect. He hassaid that only by worship carried on through innumerable births does asage gain identity with him. There is then not even the least distancebetween them. But his achievement is made during a physical life.When the Soul does not have to assume a new body - that is the realend of the physical body.
This is a portrayal of real death after which there is no rebirth. At
the other end there is physical death which the world accepts as death,
antakÂle ca mÂmeva smaranmuktvÂ kalevaram |
yaÉ prayÂti sa madbhÂvaØ yÂti nÂstyatra saØïayaÉ

Yatharth Geeta 230
Ùeb Ùeb Jeeefhe mcejvYeeJeb lÙepelÙevles keâuesJejced~
leb lecesJewefle keâewvlesÙe meoe leÆeJeYeeefJele:~~6~~
lemceelmeJex<eg keâeues<eg ceecevegmcej ÙegOÙe Ûe~
ceÙÙeefhe&leceveesyegefæcee&cesJew<ÙemÙemebMeÙeced ~~7~~DeYÙeemeÙeesieÙegòesâve Ûeslemee veevÙeieeefcevee~
hejceb heg®<eb efoJÙeb Ùeeefle heeLee&vegefÛevleÙeved~~8~~but after which the Soul has to be born again. Lord Krishn now dwells
upon this:
6. ?A man attains, O son of Kunti, to the state with the thought
of which he departs from the body because of his constant
preoccupation with that state.??
A man achieves what he bears in mind at the time of his death.
How very easy, we may be led to assume? All that we have to do is just
remember God before dying after a lifelong indulgence in pleasures.According to Lord Krishn, however, it is not like this at all. At the momentof his death a man can remember only that which he has thought of allhis life. So what is needed is lifelong contemplation. In the absence ofthis, there is no remembrance at the moment of death of the ideal statewhich has to be achieved.
7. ?So you will doubtless realize me if, with your mind and
intellect dedicated to me, you always wage war.??How are uninterrupted meditation and combat accomplished
simultaneously? It is perhaps the practice of warriors: one goes on
shooting arrows while at the same time intoning and yelling names ofdeities. But the true meaning of remembrance (internal recitation of thename) is something else and it is clarified by the Yogeshwar in thefollowing verse.
8. ?Possessed of the yog of meditation and a restrained mind,
O Parth, the man who is always absorbed in my thought
attains to the sublime radiance of God.?
Contemplation of God and practice of yog have an identical
yaØ yaØ vÂpi smaranbhÂvaØ tyajatyante kalevaram |
taØ tamevaiti kaunteya sadÂ tadbhÂvabhÂvitaÉ ||6||
tasmÂtsarveîu kÂleîu mÂmanusmara yudhya ca |
mayyarpitamanobuddhirmÂmevaiîyasyasaØïayam||7||abhyÂsayogayuktena cetasÂ nÂnyagÂminÂ |
paramaØ puruîaØ divyaØ yÂti pÂrthÂnucintayan ||8||

Chapter 8 231
keâefJeb hegjeCecevegMeeefmeleej-
        ceCeesjCeerÙeebmecevegmcejsÅe:~
meJe&mÙe OeeleejceefÛevlÙe¤he-
        ceeefolÙeJeCeË leceme: hejmleeled~~9~~meaning. The remembrance, which Lord Krishn has spoken of, requires
the worshiper to be possessed of yog and a mind so well subdued thatit never strays from God. If these conditions are met and the worshiperthen remembers constantly, he attains to the magnificence of God. Ifthe thought of other objects comes to mind, one?s remembrance is stillimperfect. Now, when, it is so subtle that it has no room for any otherthought except God and does not countenance any other urges, howcan it be possible along with the act of waging war? What kind of war isit? When the mind is pulled back from all sides and centered on theobject of worship, prompted by natural properties, feelings of attachmentand anger, of love and hatred appear as impediments in the way. Wetry to remember and concentrate, but these feelings agitate the mindand do their utmost to force it away from the desired memory.Overcoming these external impulses is fighting a war; and they can bedestroyed only by continuous meditation. This is the war that the Geetaportrays. The problem then broached is of the object of meditation andLord Krishn speaks of it.
9. ?The man who remembers God who is omniscient, without
beginning and end, dwelling in the Soul that rules all beings
the most subtle of the subtle, unmanifest, provider to all,beyond thought, imbued with the light of consciousness, andquite beyond ignorance...??
God is beyond thought and inconceivable. So long as the mind
exists, its urges survive and he is not seen. He is known only after the
perfectly restrained mind is itself dissolved. In the seventh verse LordKrishn spoke of the worshiper?s contemplation of him and now he speaksof the contemplation of God. So the instrument of meditation is someaccomplished Soul who is imbued with the awareness of reality.
kaviØ purÂàamanuïÂsitÂra-
maàoraàÍyÂØsamanusmaredyaÉ |
sarvasya dhÂtÂramacintyaröpa-
mÂdityavaràaØ tamasaÉ parastÂt ||9||

Yatharth Geeta 232
ØeÙeeCekeâeues cevemeeÛeuesve
      Yeòeâ?ee Ùegòeâes Ùeesieyeuesve ÛewJe~YeügJeesce&OÙes ØeeCeceeJesMÙe mecÙekedâ
      me leb hejb heg®<eceghewefle efoJÙeced~~10~~
Ùeo#ejb   JesoefJeoes  Jeoefvle      efJeMeefvle ÙeÅeleÙees Jeerlejeiee:~
ÙeefoÛÚvlees yeÇÿeÛeÙeË Ûejefvle
      leòes heob me*ddd«ensCe ØeJe#Ùes~~11~~10. ?With unwavering concentration, with his life-breath firmly
centered between his brows by the strength of his yog, such
a man attains to the effulgent Supreme Being.??
The worshiper who always meditates on God with a steady mind
realizes his magnificence when his mind is dissolved by the strength of
his yog- by the strength from undertaking of the ordained action- which
enables him to center the breath between the two brows so that there isneither inner agitation nor the advent of any will from an external source.
In brief, the realization comes in the state in which all properties, sattwa,
rajas and tamas, are perfectly quiet, the vision of mind remains readyon the self and it is achieved by the worshiper who always keeps it in
mind that yog is the appointed way of realization. This way is yog,
which Lord Krishn has delineated at length in Chapters four through six.He has just told Arjun, ?Always remember me.? As we have seen, this
is done by resting firmly on the precepts of yog. One who achieves this
knows the magnificence of God and becomes one with him, and thereafterhis memory is never obliterated from his mind. At this point the questionof how God is perceived at the time of departing from the body is resolved.
Let us now see the supreme condition that should be the worshiper?s
goal and to which the discourse on the Geeta reverts again and again.
11. ?I shall tell you briefly of the ultimate state which knowers of
the Ved call the imperishable, and which is realized by men
who aspire for it, act without desire, and practice continence.??
As it was observed in the exposition of the fourteenth verse of
Chapter 6, continence is uninterrupted concentration on God through a
prayÂàakÂle manasÂcalena
bhaktyÂ yukto yogabalena caiva |bhruvormadhye prÂàamÂveïya samyak
sa taØ paraØ puruîamupaiti divyam ||10||
yadakîaraØ vedavido vadantiviïanti yadyatayo vÍtarÂgÂÉ |
yadicchanto brahmacaryaØ caranti
tatte padaØ saßgraheàa pravakîye ||11||

Chapter 8 233
meJe&ÉejeefCe mebÙecÙe cevees ùefo efve®OÙe Ûe~
cetOvÙee&OeeÙeelceve: ØeeCeceeefmLelees ÙeesieOeejCeeced~~12
DeesefcelÙeskeâe#ejb yeÇÿe JÙeenjvceecevegmcejved~Ùe: ØeÙeeefle lÙepevosnb me Ùeeefle hejceeb ieefleced~~13rejection of ail external associations from the mind rather than a mere
curbing of the sexual urge. Constant meditation is true continence, for
it is this that brings about perception of God and the final absolution.
Such an exercise is the restraint of not one sense, but of all senses.
Men who can do this are true celibates. What Lord Krishn is going to tell
Arjun about this discipline is therefore something that is fit to be cherished
by all hearts.
12. ?Shutting the doors of all the sense, that is restraining them
from desire for their objects, confining his intellect within
the Self, fixing his life-breath within his mind, and absorbed
in yog,... ??
The necessity of renunciation of desire by a perfect control of the
senses is repeatedly stressed. The mind has to be confined within the
Self, not outside. With the mind so regulating the breath that it is centered
between the two eyebrows and, of course, engaged in the practice of
yog, for this is an essential prerequisite;-
13. ?He who departs from the body intoning OM, which is God in
a word, and remembering me, attains to salvation. ??The sage who dies with the knowledge that the imperishable God
is the one reality achieves the state of sublime bliss. Lord Krishn is a
yogi, a seer who has achieved awareness of the ultimate truth. As a
realized sage, an accomplished teacher, he exhorts Arjun to recite OM,
symbol of God, and contemplate him. All great Souls are known by the
name of the entity to which they attain and into which they are finally
assimilated. It is for this reason that Lord Krishn prompts Arjun to utter
the name of God but remember his own (Lord Krishn?s) form. Let us
note that he does not tell Arjun to recite his name. With the passage of
time, though, Lord Krishn was deified and men began to recite his name;
and they are rewarded but only according to the nature of their dedication.
sarvadvÂrÂài saØyamya mano hçidi nirudhya ca |
mördhnyÂdhÂyÂtmanaÉ prÂàamÂsthito yogadhÂraàÂm||12
om ityekÂkîaraØ brahma vyÂharanmÂmanusmaran|yaÉ prayÂti tyajandehaØ sa yÂti paramÂØ gatim ||13||

Yatharth Geeta 234
Lord Krishn has told Arjun that it is he who both strengthens the devotion
of such worshipers and determines their rewards. But these rewardsare destroyed along with their recipients.
It is useful to remember how Lord Shiv, the initiator of yog, insisted
on the recitation of the syllable ?Ram? that signifies the omnipresent
God who can be experienced only as an inner voice.
Sant Kabir is also said to have committed himself to the constant
recitation of the two sounds represented by ?ra? and ?m?. And Lord Krishn
here advocates the usefulness of OM. ?O aham sa OM? - that entity is
within me. God is known by innumerable names, but only that name
which prompts and confirms faith in the one God is worthy of constant
remembrance and recitation. Worshipers are rightly cautioned by Lord
Krishn that the name they recite time and again must not be one that
might incline or encourage them to believe in a multiplicity of gods and
goddesses who are nothing more than a bundle of myth. OM is unique
in the sense that it literally betokens that the supreme authority of God
inheres in every ?me?. For chanting only that name is useful which is
short and which can easily unify with the breath. So seekers must
desist from wandering here and there to find him outside themselves.
The Revered Maharaj Ji would often advise his devotees to keep
in mind his form while intoning some name like OM, Ram or Shiv to
visualize him and, with him before the mind?s eye, to remember the
identical god-the object of their worship. It is an accomplished teacher
who is kept in view while meditating. Whether we hold on to a Ram,
Krishn, or a hermit who is liberated from ail desire and pleasure of the
sense, or to any other being according to our inclination, we can know
them only by actual experience, after which they disclose to us the way
to some contemporary and accomplished teacher whose guidance we
should slowly but surely follow to conquer the material world. At the
beginning, I too used to contemplate a huge image of Lord Krishn, but
this image was gradually erased from my mind by the advent of
perception of my enlightened teacher.
Novices utter the deity?s name, but hesitate to do so while calling
a sage in human form. They are unable to discard the bias of their

Chapter 8 235
DevevÙeÛeslee: meleleb Ùees ceeb mcejefle efvelÙeMe:~
lemÙeenb megueYe: heeLe& efvelÙeÙegòeâmÙe Ùeesefieve:~~14ceecegheslÙe hegvepe&vce og:KeeueÙeceMeeÕeleced~
veehvegJeefvle cenelceeve: mebefmeefæb hejceeb ielee:~~15
DeeyeÇÿeYegJeveeuueeskeâe:  hegvejeJeefle&veesÓpeg&ve~ceecegheslÙe leg keâewvlesÙe hegvepe&vce ve efJeÅeles~~16inherited beliefs. So they call to mind some other false god instead. But
this practice is, as we have seen, forbidden by Yogeshwar Krishn asimpious. The proper way is to find refuge in some realized sage, anaccomplished or enlightened teacher, who has already gone throughthe experience. Fallacious dogmas are then destroyed and the worshiperis enabled to set upon real action as his pious impulses and the capacityto act according to them are rendered sufficiently strong. So, accordingto Lord Krishn, the mind is restrained and ultimately dissolved by asimultaneous recitation of OM and remembrance of his form. This isthe point at which the accumulated layers of sanskar-of the merits ofaction-are dissolved and all the relationships of the body severed forever.A man is not rid of the body by just physical death.
14. ?The yogi who is firmly devoted to me, and who constantly
remembers me and is absorbed in me, realizes me with ease.??Lord Krishn is easily attained to by the worshiper who has no one
except him in his mind, and who thinks steadily only of him and always
remembers him. The profit of this attainment is portrayed in the next
verse.
15. ?Accomplished sages who have attained to the ultimate state
are no longer subject to transient rebirth which is like a house
of sorrows.??
It is only after attaining to the Supreme Spirit that man is not born
again. Lord Krishn then speaks of the sphere of rebirth.16. ?All the worlds from Brahmlok downwards are, O Arjun, of a
recurrent character, but, O son of Kunti, the soul which
realizes me is not born again. ??
ananyacetÂÉ satataØ yo mÂØ smarati nityaïaÉ |
tasyÂhaØ sulabhaÉ pÂrtha nityayuktasya yoginaÉ ||14||mÂmupetya punarjanma duÉkhÂlayamaïÂïvatam |
nÂpnuvanti mahÂtmÂnaÉ saØsiddhiØ paramÂØ gatÂÉ||15
ÂbrahmabhuvanÂllokÂÉ punarÂvartino'rjuna |mÂmupetya tu kaunteya punarjanma na vidyate ||16||

Yatharth Geeta 236
The conception of different worlds (lok) in sacred books is an
exercise in the creation of metaphor. There is no dark pit in the nether
world in which we are stung and tortured by venomous creatures calledhell, nor is there a domain in the sky which we call heaven. Man himselfis a god when he is imbued with pious instincts and he, too, is a demonwhen overtaken by impious impulses.
Lord Krishn?s own kinsmen such as Kans, Shishupal, and Banasur
were cursed with demoniacal temperament. Men, gods and sub-humansconstitute the three metaphorical worlds. Lord Krishn insists that theself, carrying with himself the mind and the five senses, assumes newbodies according to the sanskar earned over innumerable lives.
Embodiments of virtue, gods, whom we call immortal, are also
subject to death. And there can be no greater loss than the destructionof piety in this mortal world. What is the use of this godlike body if itworks for the destruction of the earned righteousness? All the worlds,from the highest to the lowest, are worlds of suffering. Man alone canshape the action by which he achieves the supreme goal, after whichthere is no recurrence of birth and death. By the ordained action mancan become god and even achieve the position of Brahma himself, thefirst deity of the sacred Hindu Trinity to whom is entrusted the task ofcreation. And yet he will not be spared from rebirth until, with restraintand dissolution of the mind, he perceives God and merges into him.The Upanishad reveal the same truth. According to the Kathopanishad,the mortal human is capable of being immortal and within this physicalbody and in this world itself, he can achieve direct perception of theSupreme Spirit by the destruction of all attachments of the heart.
Is Brahma, creator of the world, himself mortal? Lord Krishn said
in Chapter 3 that the mind of Prajapati Brahma is a mere tool and Godis manifested through him. It is such great souls who have devised yagya.But it is now revealed that even one who attains to the status of Brahmahas to be reborn. After all, what does Lord Krishn really intend to say?
In truth, the realized sages, through whom God is manifested, do
not have a Brahma-like mind, but they are addressed as Brahma because

Chapter 8 237
they teach and do good. They are not Brahma in themselves, for their
mind is at last dissolved, but their mind existing in the course of worshipbefore that stage is Brahma.
The mind of an ordinary man is not Brahma. Brahma begins to be
shaped from the moment when the mind commences approaching theworshiped God. Scholars of great erudition have ascribed four stagesto this process which have been pointed out in Chapter 3. If we recallthem, they are brahmvitt, brahmividwar, brahmvidwariyan, andbrahmvidwarisht. Brahmvitt is the mind that is embellished with knowledgeof the Supreme Spirit (brahmvidya. Brahmvidwar is that which hasachieved excellence in such knowledge. Rather than just achievingdistinction in the knowledge of God, brahmavidwariyan is the mind thathas turned into a medium for the dissemination of the knowledge andfor guidance to others who wish to go along the way. Brahmawidwarishtrepresents that last stage in which it is flooded with consciousness ofthe adored God. The mind has its existence until this stage, becausethe God who irradiates it is yet removed from it. The worshiper is yetwithin the bounds of nature and, although in an elevated state, he is stillsubject to recurrent birth and death.
When the mind (Brahma) dwells in celestial radiance, the whole
being and its current of thought are awake and alert. But they areunconscious and inert when they are beset by spiritual ignorance. Thisis what has been described as brightness and darkness or day andnight. These are but figurative renderings of different states of mind.
Even in this superior, Brahma-like state, blessed with knowledge
of God and overflowing with his radiance, the relentless succession ofthe day of spiritual knowledge (which unites the Self with the SupremeSpirit) and the night of ignorance, of light and darkness, persists. Evenat this stage maya is still in command. When there is resplendence ofknowledge, insensate beings come to consciousness and they beginto see the supreme goal. On the other hand, when the mind is submergedin darkness, beings are in state of nescience (the lack of knowledge).The mind cannot then ascertain its position and the progress towards

Yatharth Geeta 238
men?eÙegieheÙe&vlecenÙe&oddyeÇÿeCees  efJeog:~
jeef$eb Ùegiemen?eevleeb lesÓnesje$eefJeoes pevee:~~17~~God comes to a standstill. These states of knowledge and ignorance
are Brahma?s day and night. In the light of day the numerous impulsesof mind are lit up by God?s effulgence, whereas in the night of ignorancethe same impulses are buried under the impenetrable gloom of insensibility.
Realization of the immutable, unmanifest God, who is
indestructible and much beyond the unmanifest mind, is effected whenthe inclinations to both good and evil, to knowledge and ignorance, areperfectly hushed, and when all the currents of will the sensible as wellas the insensible that disappear from view in the darkness of night andemerge in the light of day are obliterated.
An accomplished Soul is one who has gone beyond these four
stages of the mind. There is no mind within him because it has turnedinto a mere instrument of God. Yet he appears to have a mind becausehe instructs others and prompts them with firmness. But, in truth, he isbeyond the sway of the mind?s operation, because he has now foundhis place in the ultimate unmanifest reality and won freedom from rebirth.But prior to this, when he is still in possession of his mind, he is Brahmaand subject to rebirth. Casting light upon these matters, Lord Krishnsays:
17. ?Yogi who know the reality of one day of Brahma which is of
the duration of a thousand ages (yug) and of one night which
is also equal to a thousand ages know the essence of time.??
In the seventeenth verse, day and night are used as symbols of
knowledge and ignorance. Brahma comes into being when the mind is
endowed with the knowledge of God (brahmvitt), whereas the mind whichhas achieved the state of brahmvidwarisht marks the crowning point ofBrahma. The mind which is possessed of knowledge is Brahma?s day.When knowledge acts upon the mind, the yogi makes his way towardsGod and the innumerable predilections of his mind are suffused with hisradiance. On the other hand, when the night of ignorance prevails, the
sahasrayugaparyantamaharyadbrahmaào viduÉ |
rÂtriØ yugasahasrÂntÂØ te'horÂtravido janÂÉ ||17||

Chapter 8 239
mind and heart are swamped with the contradictions of maya between
manifold impulses. This is the furthest limit of light and darkness. Beyondthis there is neither ignorance nor knowledge, because the final essencethat is God is now directly known. Those yogi who know this essenceknow the reality of time. They know when the night of ignorance fallsand when the day of knowledge dawns, and also the limits of thedominance of time-the point to which it can pursue us.
The sages of yore described the inner realm as thought or
sometimes as intellect. In the course of time, functions of the mindwere divided into four categories which came to be known as mind,intellect, thought and ego, although impulses are in fact endless. It iswithin the mind that there are the night of ignorance and also the day ofknowledge. These are the days and nights of Brahma. In the mortalworld, which is a form of darkness, all beings lie in a state of insensibility.Roaming about amidst nature, their mind fails to perceive the radiantGod. But they who practice yog have woken up from the slumber ofinsensibility and begun to make their way towards God.
According to Goswami Tulsidas in the Ram Charit Manas, his
version of the Ramayana, even the mind possessed of knowledge isdegraded to the state of ignorance by evil association. But it is re-imbued with light by virtuous company. This alternation of spiritualascendancy and decline continues till the moment of attainment. Afterrealization of the ultimate goal, however, there are no Brahma, no mind,no night, and no day. Brahma?s day and night are just metaphors. Thereis neither a night nor a day of a thousand years, nor even a Brahma withfour faces. The brahmvitt, brahmvidwar, brahmvidwariyan, andbrahmvidwarisht, four successive stages of mind, are his four faces,and the four main divisions of the mind are his four ages (yug). Day andnight abide in the tendencies and operations of the mind. Men whoknow this secret understand the mystery of time- how far it pursues usand who can transc end it. Lord Krishn then goes on to explain the deeds
that belong to day as also those that belong to night: what is done in thestate of knowledge and that which is done in the obscurity of ignorance.

Yatharth Geeta 240
DeJÙeòeâeoddJÙeòeâÙe: meJee&: ØeYeJevlÙenjeieces~
je$Ùeeieces ØeueerÙevles le$ewJeeJÙeòeâme_%ekesâ~~18~~Yetle«eece: me SJeeÙeb YetlJee YetlJee ØeueerÙeles~
je$ÙeeiecesÓJeMe:  heeLe&  ØeYeJelÙenjeieces~~19~~
hejmlemceeòeg YeeJeesÓvÙeesÓJÙeòeâesÓJÙeòeâelmeveeleve:~Ùe: me meJex<eg Yetles<eg veMÙelmeg ve efJeveMÙeefle~~20~~18. ?All manifest beings are born from the subtle body of Brahma
at the outset of his day and are also dissolved in the same
unmanifest body at the fall of his night.??
With the dawning of a day of Brahma?s, that is, with the inception
of knowledge, all beings come awake in their unmanifest mind, and it is
within the same subtle, unmanifest mind that they lapse into
unconsciousness. They are unable to see the Supreme Spirit, but theyhave an existence. The mind, unmanifest and invisible, is the medium
of both consciousness and unconsciousness, of both knowledge and
nescience (the lack of knowledge).
19. ?The beings who thus wake up into consciousness are
compelled by nature to relapse into unconsciousness with
the coming of night and they are then, O Parth, reborn withthe advent of day.??
As long as the mind persists, the succession of knowledge and
ignorance goes on. So long as this continues, the seeker is only a
worshiper rather than an accomplished sage.
20. ?But beyond the unmanifest Brahma there is the eternal,
unmanifest God who is not destroyed even after the
destruction of all beings.??
On the one hand, the mind that is Brahma is imperceptible. It
cannot be known by the senses. On the other, there is the eternal,
unmanifest Supreme Spirit who is not destroyed even with the destructionof physical beings, or of the invisible Brahma (mind) which gains
consciousness with the arising of knowledge and sinks intounconsciousness with the setting of knowledge into the darkness of
avyaktÂdvyaktayaÉ sarvÂÉ prabhavantyaharÂgame |
rÂtryÂgame pralÍyante tatraivÂvyaktasaØjáake ||18||bhötagrÂmaÉ sa evÂyaØ bhötvÂ bhötvÂ pralÍyate |
rÂtryÂgame'vaïaÉ pÂrtha prabhavatyaharÂgame ||19||
parastasmÂttu bhÂvo'nyo'vyakto'vyaktÂtsanÂtanaÉ |yaÉ sa sarveîu bhöteîu naïyatsu na vinaïyati ||20||

Chapter 8 241
DeJÙeòeâesÓ#ej FlÙegòeâmleceeng: hejceeb ieefleced~
Ùeb ØeehÙe ve efveJele&vles leæece hejceb cece~~21
heg®<e: me hej: heeLe& YekeälÙee ueYÙemlJevevÙeÙee~
ÙemÙeevle:mLeeefve Yetleeefve Ùesve meJe&efceob leleced~~22Ùe$e keâeues lJeveeJe=efòeceeJe=efòeb ÛewJe Ùeesefieve:~
ØeÙeelee Ùeeefvle leb keâeueb Je#Ùeeefce Yejle<e&Ye~~23ignorance. God exists even after the destruction of inclinations of the
mind which wake up in the light of day and fall back into insensibility in
the darkness of night. These upward and downward motions of the
mind cease only after the attainment of God who is the ultimate abode.With the realization of the Supreme Spirit, the mind is coloured by him
and becomes what he is. This is the point when the mind is annihilated
and in its place only the eternal, unmanifest God remains.
21. ?The unmanifest and imperishable God who is said to be
salvation and after realizing whom one does not come back
to the world, is my ultimate abode.??
That eternal unmanifest state is immortal and that is called
enlightenment (or attainment) of the supreme goal. Lord Krishn says,
?This is my ultimate abode, after attaining which one does not return tomortal life and is not reborn.? So now he tells Arjun this way of achieving
that eternal, unmanifest state.
22. ?And, O Parth that God in whom all beings exist and who
permeates the whole world is realized by steady devotion.??Steady, unswerving devotion means the act of remembering none
else except God so as to be one with him. Lord Krishn then reveals
when even men of such devotion are within the limits of rebirth andwhen they are beyond it.
23. ?And, O the best of Bharat, I shall now enlighten you on the
ways by which, after giving up their bodies, yogi arrive at the
state of birth-lessness as well as of rebirth.??
Freedom from rebirth, as we are about to see, is achieved by
those who dwell in the light of knowledge.
avyakto'kîara ityuktastamÂhuÉ paramÂØ gatim |
yaØ prÂpya na nivartante taddhÂma paramaØ mama.21
puruîaÉ sa paraÉ pÂrtha bhaktyÂ labhyastvananyayÂ |
yasyÂntaÉsthÂni bhötÂni yena sarvamidaØ tatam ||22yatra kÂle tvanÂvçttimÂvçttiØ caiva yoginaÉ |
prayÂtÂ yÂnti taØ kÂlaØ vakîyÂmi bharatarîabha ||23

Yatharth Geeta 242
DeefivepÙeexeflejn: Megkeäue: <eCceemee GòejeÙeCeced~
le$e ØeÙeelee ieÛÚefvle yeÇÿe yeÇÿeefJeoes pevee:~~24
Oetcees jeef$emleLee ke=â<Ce: <eCceemee oef#eCeeÙeveced~
le$e Ûeevõcemeb pÙeesefleÙeexieer ØeehÙe efveJele&les~~25~~Megkeäueke=â<Ces ieleer ¢esles peiele: MeeÕeles celes~
SkeâÙee ÙeelÙeveeJe=efòecevÙeÙeeJele&les hegve:~~26~~24. ?They who depart from the body in the presence of bright
flames, daylight, the sun, the waxing moon of the bright half
of a month, and the dazzlingly clear sky of the time when the
sun moves northwards, attain to God.??
Fire is a symbol of God?s radiance as day is of knowledge. The
bright half of lunar month stands for purity. The six virtues of
discrimination, renunciation, restraint, tranquility, courage and intellect
are the six months of the ascendant motion of the sun. The state of
upward motion is the progress of the sun to the north of the equator.
Enlightened by knowledge of the reality which is quite beyond nature,
sages attain to God and they are then not reborn. But what happen to
the worshipers who do not realize this state of divine magnificence in
spite of their devotion?
25. ?Dying during prevalence of the darkness of a gloomy night,
the dark half of a lunar month, and the six months of the
downward course of the sun, the yogi who desires fruits of
his action attains to the dim light of the moon and is reborn
after enjoying his rewards in heaven.?
That Soul is yet far removed from God who departs from the body
when the sacred fire of his yagya is smothered by smoke, when the
night of ignorance prevails, when the moon is waning in the dark half of
a month, when gloom prevails on all sides and the outward looking
mind is infested with the six vices of passion, wrath, greed, delusion,
vanity and malice and he is reborn. Does it mean, however, that along
with his body the worship, too, of this seeker is destroyed?
26. ?The way of brightness (that leads to God) and the way of
darkness that takes one to the afterworld (the world of Manes
agnirjyotirahaÉ ïuklaÉ îaàmÂsÂ uttarÂyaàam |
tatra prayÂtÂ gacchanti brahma brahmavido janÂÉ||24
dhömo rÂtristathÂ kçîàaÉ îaàmÂsÂ dakîiàÂyanam |
tatra cÂndramasaØ jyotiryogÍ prÂpya nivartate ||25||ïuklakçîàe gatÍ hyete jagataÉ ïÂïvate mate |
ekayÂ yÂtyanÂvçttimanyayÂvartate punaÉ ||26||

Chapter 8 243
to which departed ancestors have gone) are the two eternal
ways in the world. One who takes the first achieves
birthlessness, whereas the treader on the second is subject
to repeated birth and death.??
Both the ways, of light and darkness, of knowledge and ignorance,
have been forever. But the merits of worship are never destroyed. The
one who dies in the state of knowledge and brightness achieves ultimate
salvation, but the one who departs from the body in the state of ignorance
and obscurity has to come back and undergo yet another birth. And this
succession of one birth after another goes on until there is perfect light;
until that moment the seeker has to carry on his worship. The problem
is fully resolved at this point and Lord Krishn then dwells upon the
means which are essential for the attainment of final liberation.
27. ?You should always rest upon yog, O Parth, for the yogi who
knows the reality of the two ways is never deceived.??Knowing the two ways well, the yogi is aware that after gaining
the full divine light, ultimate bliss will be attained and his act of worship
will not be destroyed even if he is reborn because of dying in ignorance.
Both the ways have also been forever. So Arjun should at all time
practice yog and devote himself to worship, for-
28. ?Knowing this secret, the yogi transcends the rewards of Vedic
study, sacrificial rites, penance, and charity and so achieves
salvation.??
By his contemplation of God, the fruit of yagya, the yogi who
comes to know the identical Supreme Spirit by direct perception rather
than by just belief or assumption goes beyond the promised rewards,
and is liberated forever. This direct perception of the Supreme Spirit is
vewles me=leer heeLe& peevevÙeesieer ceg¢eefle keâ§eve~
lemceelmeJex<eg keâeues<eg ÙeesieÙegòeâes YeJeepeg&ve~~27~~Jesos<eg  Ùe%es<eg  lehe:meg  ÛewJe
      oeves<eg ÙelhegCÙeHeâueb Øeefo°ced~
DelÙesefle lelmeJe&efceob efJeefolJee      Ùeesieer hejb mLeeveceghewefle ÛeeÅeced~~28~~naite sçtÍ pÂrtha jÂnanyogÍ muhyati kaïcana |tasmÂtsarveîu kÂleîu yogayukto bhavÂrjuna ||27||vedeîu yajáeîu tapaÉsu caiva
       dÂneîu yatpuàyaphalaØ pradiîòam |
atyeti tatsarvamidaØ viditvÂ       yogÍ paraØ sthÂnamupaiti cÂdyam ||28||

Yatharth Geeta 244
named Ved that which has been directly revealed by God himself. So
when that unmanifest essence itself is known, there remains nothingmore to know. After this even the need for the Ved is therefore doneaway with, for the knower is now no different from him who had revealedit to their seer-composers. Yagya or the appointed task was a necessityearlier, but once the reality is known there remains nothing else to prayfor. To subject the senses along with the mind to austerities is penance,but even that is unnecessary now. A total self surrender, in thought,speech and action, is charity. And the auspicious fruit of all these is theattainment of God. And all these are now unnecessary because thedesired goal is no longer away from the seeker. The yogi who hasrealized God transcends the rewards of all these virtuous acts- yagya,penance, charity and others and achieves absolution.
???????????????
Five main points have been elaborated in the chapter. At the
beginning, made curious by problem hinted at by Lord Krishn at the endof Chapter 7, Arjun puts forward seven questions. He wishes to knowthe nature of the Supreme Spirit, adhyatm, the perfect action, adhidaiv,adhibhoot  and adhiyagya, and how he (Lord Krishn) may be so knownat the end that he is never forgotten thereafter. Replying to thesequestions, Lord Krishn tells him that the one who is imperishable isGod. The devotion that secures realization of God is adhyatm; it is theknowledge that brings man under the domination of Self by freeing himfrom the supremacy of maya. Shedding away the innate properties ofnature which produce good or evil impressions (sanskar)- the annihilationor destruction of these properties is the perfection of action. There is noneed of any further action after this. So true action is something thatdestroys the very source of the merits that are called sanskar.
Transient, perishable desires are adhibhoot. In other words, that
which is destroyed is the medium for the generation of all beings. TheSupreme Spirit is adhidaiv and in him is dissolved the treasure of divinity.Lord Krishn is himself adhiyagya in the body for all the sacrifices of yagyaare made to him. He is the agent who effects the sacrifices. And he isalso the one in whom the sacrifices are all dissolved. Adhiyagya is
someone who lives within the body, not out of it. Arjun?s last question is

Chapter 8 245
how he (Lord Krishn) is known at the end. Lord Krishn tells him that
men who contemplate him alone and nothing else, and who depart from
the body thinking of him, know him by direct perception and become
one with what they have perceived. Since they have always contemplatedhim, at the end also they attain to what they have borne in mind at all
time. It is not that this attainment comes after physical death. If perfection
were to come only after physical death, Lord Krishn would not beimmaculate. Were it so, he would not have the knowledge that is gained
from the practice of spiritual discipline through a number of lives. The real
end comes when even the wholly restrained mind ceases to be, afterwhich the process of assum ing new bodies is discontinued forever. The
worshiper then merges into the Supreme Spirit and is not reborn thereafter.
According to Lord Krishn remembrance is the way to this
realization. So Arjun should constantly keep him in mind and wage war.
How is it possible to do both at once? Is it that Lord Krishn is referring
thus to the usual practice of fighting and at the same time uttering thename of some deity? Remembrance, as he defines it, is incessant
contemplation of him without a thought of anything else. When
remembrance is so refined and intent, who can fight? What war is possible
with such intense absorption of the mind on a single object. In fact, the
real form of the ?war? that is the theme of the Geeta emerges only when
a worshiper is immersed in such total and unswerving contemplation.This is also the state in which the obstructive properties of maya are
clearly visible. Passion, anger, attachment and aversion are our most
terrible enemies. They obstruct the worshiper?s memory and to overcomethem is to fight a war. The supreme goal is reached only after the
destruction of these enemies.
So Arjun is counselled to recite the sacred syllable of OM but
contemplate the form of Lord Krishn, an adept in yog. While recitingand at the same time visualizing the known form of a noble mentor, an
accomplished or enlightened teacher, is the key to successful worship.
In the chapter Lord Krishn has also taken up the problem of rebirth
and said that the whole world, from Brahma himself to the lowest of
creatures, repeats itself. But even after all of them are destroyed, his

Yatharth Geeta 246
(Lord Krishn?s) sublime, unmanifest being and the steady devotion to
him never come to an end.
A man who is initiated into yog is provided with two ways by
which he may proceed. On the first of these two paths, blessed with the
radiance of perfect knowledge, possessed of six-fold excellence (verse24), in a state of upward motion, and absolutely free from any blemish,the worshiper is assured of redemption. But if there is even the leastimperfection about him or any touch of the gloom that prevails in thedark fortnight of a month, and he departs from the body in such a state,he has to undergo yet another birth. However, since he has been aworshiper, instead of being forever enmeshed in the vicious web ofbirth and death, after his new birth he sets himself anew to the task ofcompleting his unaccomplished worship.
Thus, following the path of action in his next birth, the imperfect
worshiper too can reach the supreme goal. Lord Krishn has also saidearlier that even a partial accomplishment of worship does not ceaseuntil it has brought about liberation from the great fear of life and death.Both the ways are eternal and indestructible. The man who understandsthis is ever steady and in repose. So Arjun is advised to be a yogi, fora yogi transcends even the sacred rewards of study of the Ved, penance,yagya and charity and so attains to ultimate liberation.
At several points in the chapter there is a reference to the supreme
goal as the attainments of God, who is represented as unmanifest,imperishable and eternal.
Thus concludes the Eighth Chapter, in the Upanishad of theShreemadbhagwadgeeta, on the Knowledge of the Supreme
Spirit, the Discipline of Yog, and the Dialogue between
Lord Krishn and Arjun, entitled.
?Akshar Brahm Yog?, or  ?Yog with the Imperishable God?.
Thus concludes the Most Revered Paramhans Paramanand Ji?s
disciple Swami Adgadanand?s exposition of the Eighth Chapter
of the Shreemadbhagwadgeeta in ??Yatharth Geeta??, entitled:
?Akshar Brahm Yog?.
HARI OM TAT SAT

Chapter 9 247
CHAPTER 9
STIRRING TO SPIRITUAL
ENLIGHTENMENT
Till Chapter 6, Lord Krishn made a systematic investigation of
yog. Its precise meaning, as we have seen, is the conduct of yagya.
Yagya represents that special form of worship which provides accessto God, and in which the whole animate and inanimate world is offered
as a sacrifice. The immortal essence is known with restraint of mind
and ultimate dissolution of the restrained mind itself. The one whopartakes of what is generated by yagya at its completion is a truly
enlightened man, a realized sage and accomplished teacher who is
united with the eternal God. This union, joining together of the individualand the Cosmic Soul, is named yog. The conduct of yagya is called
action. Lord Krishn then went on to say in Chapter 7 that the doers of
this action know him along with the all-pervasive God, perfect action,adhyatm and adhidaiv, as well as adhibhoot and adhiyagya. He further
added in Chapter 8 that this is salvation, which is the supreme goal.
In the present chapter he raises the question of the greatness of
the Soul who is endowed with yog. Pervading all, he is nonetheless yetuninvolved. Although he acts, he is yet a non-doer. Besides illumining
the nature and influence of this accomplished Soul, the chapter alsocontains a warning against such hindrances as other gods in the way of
the practice of yog; it also stresses the importance of finding shelter
under a realized sage, an accomplished teacher, who is possessed ofsuch a Soul.
1. ??The Lord said, ?I shall instruct you well with analogy in this
mysterious knowledge, O the sinless, after knowing which
you will be liberated from this sorrowful world.? ??
ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
Fob  leg  les  ieg¢eleceb  ØeJe#ÙeecÙevemetÙeJes~%eeveb efJe%eevemeefnleb Ùep%eelJee cees#ÙemesÓMegYeeled~~1~~ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-idaØ tu te guhyatamaØ pravakîyÂmyanasöyave |jáÂnaØ vijáÂnasahitaØ yajjáÂtvÂ mokîyase'ïubhÂt ||1

Yatharth Geeta 248
jepeefJeÅee jepeieg¢eb heefJe$eefceocegòececed~
ØelÙe#eeJeieceb OecÙeË megmegKeb keâleg&ceJÙeÙeced~~2By offering to impart this knowledge with ?vigyan,? Lord Krishn
means that he will illustrate it with the achievements of a great Soul of
attainment: how he functions simultaneously at all places, how heenlightens, and how as a charioteer he always stands beside the self.Knowing this, Arjun will be emancipated from this world of misery wherehappiness is impermanent. What that knowledge is?
2. ??This (knowledge) is the monarch of all learning as well as
of all mysteries, most sacred, doubtlessly propitious, easy
to practice, and indestructible.??
Substantiated by illustration, this knowledge is the sovereign of
all learning. But ?learning? here does not mean mastering a language or
scholarship in its usual sense. True learning is that which enables theman who has acquired it to go along God?s way until he has won salvation.If he gets entangled in the vanity of his achievements or in the materialworld while he is on the way, it is evident that his learning has failed.His learning, then, is not knowledge but a veil of ignorance. It is onlyregal learning (rajvidya), spiritual enlightenment, which is profitablebeyond any doubt. It is the king of all ?secret teaching? because onecan approach it only after the practice of yog is brought to perfection bythe unraveling of the knots of both knowledge and ignorance. Holiest ofthe holy and blessed with excellence, it is also manifestly fruitful. Theprofit from it is so transparent. No sooner does a man have it than he isrewarded. It is not the blind faith that we will be rewarded in the next lifeif we are virtuous in this life. Buttressed by awareness of its operation,this knowledge is indestructible and easy to act upon.
Yogeshwar Krishn has told Arjun in Chapter 2 that the seed of
yog never perishes. Practicing it in even a small measure providesliberation from the great fear of repeated birth and death. In Chapter 6,Arjun requested the Lord to tell him the lot of the feeble worshiper who
rÂjavidyÂ rÂjaguhyaØ pavitramidamuttamam |
pratyakîÂvagamaØ dharmyaØ susukhaØ kartumavyayam

Chapter 9 249
DeßeöOeevee: heg®<ee Oece&mÙeemÙe hejvlehe~
DeØeehÙe ceeb efveJele&vles ce=lÙegmebmeejJelce&efve~~3~~ceÙee  leleefceob  meJeË  peieoJÙeòeâcetefle&vee~
celmLeeefve meJe&Yetleeefve ve Ûeenb les<JeJeefmLele:~~4~~strays from yog and is, therefore, deprived of the perception which is
its final achievement. Lord Krishn then said that the primary need is toknow the way of this action (yog) after which, if a man just takes acouple of steps on it, the merit earned by them is never destroyed. Hecarries this sanskar along with him to the next life and by virtue of itperforms the same action with every birth. Thus practicing yog overmany lives, he at last arrives at the state of salvation, the supremegoal. The same point is made again in the present chapter when LordKrishn says that although the practice of yog is easy and indestructible,faith is its indispensable requirement.
3. ?Men who have no faith in this knowledge, O Parantap, do
not attain to me and are doomed to roaming about the mortal
world.?
Even the smallest bit of practice of this dharm is never destroyed,
but the man whose mind is not fully centered on the object of his worship
undergoes repeated birth and death instead of attaining to Lord Krishn.Hence faith (shraddha) is essential. Now the Yogeshwar speaks aboutGod?s omnipresence:
4. ?The whole world is pervaded by me, the unmanifest Supreme
Being, and all beings dwell within my will but I am not in
them.?
The unmanifest form in which Lord Krishn exists spreads through
every atom of the universe and all beings have their life within him. But
he is not in them because he exists in an unmanifest form.
Since accomplished sages are one with the unmanifest God, they
discard their bodies, speak from the same level and act in the samedivine state.
aïraddadhÂnÂÉ puruîÂ dharmasyÂsya parantapa |
aprÂpya mÂØ nivartante mçtyusaØsÂravartmani ||3||mayÂ tatamidaØ sarvaØ jagadavyaktamörtinÂ |
matsthÂni sarvabhötÂni na cÂhaØ teîvavasthitaÉ ||4||

Yatharth Geeta 250
ve Ûe celmLeeefve Yetleeefve heMÙe ces ÙeesiecewÕejced~
YetleYe=Ve Ûe YetlemLees ceceelcee YetleYeeJeve:~~5~~ÙeLeekeâeMeefmLelees efvelÙeb JeeÙeg: meJe&$eiees ceneved~
leLee meJee&efCe Yetleeefve celmLeeveerlÙegheOeejÙe~~6~~
meJe&Yetleeefve keâewvlesÙe Øeke=âefleb Ùeeefvle ceeefcekeâeced~keâuhe#eÙes hegvemleeefve keâuheeoew efJeme=peecÙenced~~7~~5. ?And even all beings are not within me, and such is the power
of my yog-maya that my Spirit, the creator and preserver of
all beings, is not within them.?
Even all beings are not within Lord Krishn, because they are mortal
and dependent on nature. But such is the greatness of his yog that although
he creates and sustains all beings, his Spirit is not in them. I am in the
form of the Self not within those beings. This is the achievement ofyog. Lord Krishn cites an instance to elucidate the point:
6. ?Be it known to you that all beings dwell in me just as the
great wind that roams everywhere always dwells in the sky.?
The wind is always in the sky, but cannot taint and affect its
brightness. Similarly, all beings are within Lord Krishn, but he is
unblemished like the sky. The problem of the power of yog is now resolved.So Lord Krishn next takes up the question of what the yogi does.
7. ?All beings, O son of Kunti, attain to my nature and merge
into it at the end of a cycle (kalp) and I recreate them at the
beginning of another cycle.?
He reshapes beings with special care at the beginning of a phase.
They had existed earlier, but they were misshapen. Now he gives them
a more refined, more perfect shape. They who were lying in a state ofinsensibility, he now renders conscious. He also prompts beings to
kalp in the other sense of the word. Besides ?cycle of time??, kalp also
means a change for the better. It is the beginning of a kalp when, escapingfrom demoniacal and negative impulses, a man comes by the treasure
of divinity; and it comes to a close with the worshiper?s becoming onewith God. A kalp ceases to be after its purpose is achieved. The
na ca matsthÂni bhötÂni païya me yogamaiïvaram |
bhötabhçnna ca bhötastho mamÂtmÂ bhötabhövanaÉ5yathÂkÂïasthito nityaØ vÂyuÉ sarvatrago mahÂn |
tathÂ sarvÂài bhötÂni matsthÂnÍtyupadhÂraya ||6||
sarvabhötÂni kaunteya prakçtiØ yÂnti mÂmikÂm |kalpakîaye punastÂni kalpÂdau visçjÂmyaham ||7||

Chapter 9 251
Øeke=âefleb mJeeceJe°YÙe efJeme=peeefce hegve: hegve:~
Yetle«eeceefceceb ke=âlmveceJeMeb Øeke=âlesJe&Meeled~~8~~ve Ûe ceeb leeefve keâcee&efCe efveyeOveefvle OeveÀeÙe~
GoemeerveJeoemeervecemeòebâ   les<eg   keâce&meg~~9~~commencement of worship is the beginning, while the culmination at
which the goal is perceived is its end-the point when the Soul, freedfrom such feelings as attachment and repulsion which effect the creationof all beings who have to be reborn, dwells in his identical, eternal form.This is what Lord Krishn means by saying that beings merge into hisnature.
But what kind of ?nature? can belong to a sage who has annihilated
all nature and become one with God? Does his nature still survive? AsLord Krishn has said in the thirty-third verse of Chapter 3, all beingsattain to their own nature. They act according to their predominantproperty; and even the sage who has achieved knowledge by directperception acts according to his disposition. He works for the good ofthose who have straggled. The conduct-the way of life - of the sagewho dwells in the ultimate essence is his nature. He conducts himselfaccording to the state of his being. At the end of kalp, men attain to thisconduct-this way of life-of accomplished teacher, of realized sages.Lord Krishn then throws further light on the accomplishment by suchgreat Souls.
8. ?I repeatedly shape all these beings, who are helplessly
dependent on their innate properties, according to their
action.??
Accepting the way of life which is given to him; Lord Krishn
continuously and with special care fashions and refashions all beings
who dwell in their own nature and are dominated by the three properties:he prompts them to advance towards the state of his own Self. Doesthis mean, however, that he also is bound by action?
9. ?Unattached and disinterested in these acts, O Dhananjay, I
am not bound by action.?
prakçtiØ svÂmavaîòabhya visçjÂmi punaÉ punaÉ |
bhötagrÂmamimaØ kçtsnamavaïaØ prakçtervaïÂt ||8||na ca mÂØ tÂni karmÂài nibadhnanti dhanaájaya |
udÂsÍnavadÂsÍnamasaktaØ teîu karmasu ||9||

Yatharth Geeta 252
ceÙeeOÙe#esCe Øeke=âefle: metÙeles meÛejeÛejced~
nslegveevesve  keâewvlesÙe  peieefÉheefjJele&les~~10~~According to the ninth verse of Chapter 4 a sage?s way of action
is unworldly. The fourth verse of the present chapter says that he works
in an unmanifest way. Now Lord Krishn says the same thing here again:that he is not attached to the actions he performs imperceptibly. Sincethe union of his Soul with the Supreme Spirit has bestowed a state ofdetachment on him, he is no longer bound by action. Since he is nowabiding in the very goal that is achieved by action, he is not compelledto do it.
So far, the question was of the relationship between acts of nature
and the innate property-of the sage?s way of life and action. Now whatis that which maya creates by assuming the property that belongs toLord Krishn? That, too, is kalp.
10. ?In association with me, O son of Kunti, my maya shapes
this world of the animate and the inanimate, and the world
revolves like a wheel of recurrence for the aforesaid reason.?
By virtue of his spirit that permeates the whole world, this maya
(the three-propertied nature, in both its eightfold insensate and conscious
forms) shapes the animate and inanimate world. This is the inferior kalpand it is because of this that the world moves in its cycle of birth anddeath-of coming and going. This lowly kalp that nature brings about,mutable and destructive, is accomplished by maya by virtue of LordKrishn?s innate property. It is not made by him, but the kalp of theseventh verse, which marks the commencement of the Supreme goal,is a creation of the sage himself. In this kalp he himself is the doer whocreates with special care, but in the other kalp, nature is the agentwhich by mere reflection of its might creates the state of transience inwhich there is change of bodies, of time, and of ages. But althoughLord Krishn is so all-pervasive, the deluded do not yet know him.
mayÂdhyakîeàa prakçtiÉ söyate sacarÂcaram |
hetunÂnena kaunteya jagadviparivartate ||10||

Chapter 9 253
DeJepeeveefvle ceeb cet{e ceeveg<eeR levegceeefßeleced~
hejb  YeeJecepeevevlees  cece  YetlecensÕejced~~11
ceesIeeMee ceesIekeâcee&Cees ceesIe%eevee efJeÛesleme:~
je#emeerceemegjeR ÛewJe Øeke=âefleb ceesefnveeR efßelee:~~12cenelceevemleg ceeb heeLe& owJeeR Øeke=âefleceeefßelee:~
YepevlÙevevÙecevemees %eelJee YetleeefoceJÙeÙeced~~1311. ??The deluded who do not know my ultimate being regard me
in the human form as but an inferior mortal.??
The ignorant who do not know his identity with the Supreme Spirit,
the God of all beings, regard Lord Krishn as human and therefore paltry.
He dwells in the exalted state of that Supreme Spirit who is the God ofall beings, but ignorant men do not know it because he is in mortalform. They address him as a man. And they are hardly to blame. Whenthey look at Lord Krishn, they see only the body of the great Soul. Howthen are they to know that he dwells in the being of the great God? It isnow explained why they are unable to realize the truth.
12. ?The ignorant are, like evil spirits, afflicted with the property
of darkness and so their hopes and actions and knowledge
are all futile.??
The unaware are possessed of futile hope (which can never be
fulfilled), futile action (which binds), and futile knowledge (which is really
ignorance). Lying in the chasm of unconsciousness and characterizedby the gullible nature of devils and demons, by demoniacal nature, theybelieve Lord Krishn to be but a man. Demons and devils merely representa property of the mind which has nothing to do with any caste or class.Men with such an inclination are  unable to know the reality of LordKrishn, but sages know him and adore him.
13. ?But, O Parth, they who have found shelter in divine nature
and know me as the eternal, imperishable source of all beings,
worship me with perfect devotion.??
avajÂnanti mÂØ mödhÂ mÂnuîÍØ tanumÂïritam |
paraØ bhÂvamajÂnanto mama bhötamaheïvaram ||11||
moghÂïÂ moghakarmÂào moghajáÂnÂ vicetasaÉ |
rÂkîasÍmÂsurÍØ caiva prakçtiØ mohinÍØ ïritÂÉ ||12||mahÂtmÂnastu mÂØ pÂrtha daivÍØ prakçtimÂïritÂÉ |
bhajantyananyamanaso jáÂtvÂ bhötÂdimavyayam ||13

Yatharth Geeta 254
The sages who take refuge in pious impulses, the treasure of
divinity, and regard Lord Krishn as the primal source of all beings,
unmanifest and eternal, always meditate upon him with devotion onlyto him and without permitting the thought of anyone else into their mind.The following verse dwells upon the mode of this worship.
14. ?Always engaged in the recital of my name and virtues, ever-
active to realize me, and constantly offering obeisance to
me, devotees with a firm determination worship me withundivided faith.?
Abiding firmly in the observance of the act of devotion, bowing
low to Lord Krishn in homage and dwelling in him, men who know the
truth endeavour to realize him and worship him with staunch devotion.They are constantly engaged in the act of remembrance and recital,which is nothing else than the yagya that has already been illumined.The same rite is here restated in brief.
15. ?While some worship me by gyan-yagya as the all-
encompassing Supreme Spirit with the feeling that I am all,
some worship me with a sense of identity, some with a senseof being separate from me (regarding me as master andthemselves as servants), while yet others worship me in manya different fashion.?
Men who are aware of reality worship Lord Krishn by practicing
the appointed Way of Discrimination or Knowledge after a due appraisal
of their assets and liabilities as well as of their own strength. Someothers worship him with a feeling of being identical with him-the feelingthat they have to be one with him by dissociating themselves fromeverything that is other than him; and they devote themselves to himwith the total dedication of the Way of Selfless Action. Similarly, there
meleleb  keâerle&Ùevlees  ceeb  Ùelevle§e  Â{?elee:~
vecemÙevle§e ceeb YekeälÙee efvelÙeÙegòeâe Gheemeles~~14~~
%eeveÙe%esve ÛeehÙevÙes Ùepevlees ceecegheemeles~SkeâlJesve he=LekeälJesve yengOee efJeÕeleescegKeced~~15~~
satataØ kÍrtayanto mÂØ yatantaïca dçÅhavratÂÉ |
namasyantaïca mÂØ bhaktyÂ nityayuktÂ upÂsate ||14||
jáanayajáena cÂpyanye yajanto mÂmupÂsate |ekatvena pçthaktvena bahudhÂ viïvatomukham ||15||

Chapter 9 255
Denb ?eâlegjnb Ùe%e: mJeOeencenceew<eOeced~
cev$eesÓncencesJeepÙecenceefivejnb  ngleced~~16~~are many other forms of worship. In fact, however, these are all only
the higher and lower phases of the same spiritual observance that iscalled yagya. Yagya begins with reverent service, but how is it performed?By his own admission, Yogeshwar Lord Krishn is himself the doer ofyagya. If the sage does not act as the charioteer, the successfulaccomplishment of yagya is impossible. It is only by his guidance thatthe worshiper is able to know the stage of spiritual accomplishment atwhich he stands and the point on the way he has reached. Lord Krishnthen speaks about the performer of yagya.
16. ?I am the action that is undertaken, the yagya, the fulfillment
of earlier resolutions, the healer, the sacred prayer, the
oblation as well as the sacred fire, and I am also the sacrificialact of oblation.?
Lord Krishn is the doer-the agent. In truth, the power behind the
worshiper who always urges him on is that of the adored God. So the
worshiper?s accomplishment is only a gift from him. He is also theyagya which is the appointed mode of worship. The man who tastes thenectar that is generated at the successful completion of yagya is unitedwith the eternal God. Lord Krishn is also the oblation, for it is in him thatthe endless sanskar of the past is dissolved; their ultimate resolution isprovided by him. He is also the remedy that cures the malady of worldlymisery. Men are rid of this ailment by attaining to him. He is also thesacred incantation that is offered to the deity, for it is he who providesthe strength by  which the mind is concentrated on breath. Being theone who adds to the ardour of this deed, he is also the matter which isoffered as oblation. He is also the sacred fire, because all desires ofthe mind are burnt out in his radiant flame. And he is also the sacrificialact of yagya.
Here Lord Krishn repeatedly speaks in the first person: ?I am ... I
am?? The implication of this is only that it is he who stands inseparably
ahaØ kraturahaØ yajáaÉ svadhÂhamahamauîadham |
mantro'hamahamevÂjyamahamagnirahaØ hutam ||16||

Yatharth Geeta 256
with the individual Self as an inspiration and leads the observance of
yagya to successful completion by constant appraisal. This is namedvigyan. The Most Revered Maharaj Ji would repeatedly tell us that theact of devotional adoration does not begin until the revered God appearsas the charioteer to restrain each single breath. We may close oureyes, engage in the act of pious adoration, and mortify the senses bysevere austerities, but unless the desired God comes down to the levelat which we are  and stands inseparably and watchful by the Self, theessence of worship cannot be gained. This is why Maharaj Ji used tosay, ?If you but behold me, I shall give you everything.? It is the sameas Lord Krishn?s saying that he is the doer of all.
17. ?And I too am the bearer and preserver of the whole world as
also the giver of rewards for action; father, mother and also
the grandsire; the sacred, imperishable OM who is worthy ofbeing known; and all Ved-Rig, Sam and Yajur.?
It is Lord Krishn who supports the whole world. He is the ?father?
who provides, the ?mother? who conceives and gives birth, and the
?grandsire? who is the ancient source into whom all being also merge atlast. He is worthy of being known as also the sacred OM which mayalso be interpreted as the Self?s resemblance to God (aham+akarah =Omkarah).
That OM (God) is identical with him and so his Self is fit for
knowing. He is also the agent of the three parts of the observance ofyog: Rig-adequate prayer, Sam-evenness of mind; and Yajur- theordained yagya for union with the Supreme Spirit.
18. ?I am the supreme goal, the sustainer and Lord of all, the
maker of good and evil, the abode and shelter of all, the
benefactor who wants nothing in return, the beginning and
efheleencemÙe peielees ceelee Oeelee efheleecen:~
JesÅeb heefJe$ecees¿ej $e+keämeece ÙepegjsJe Ûe~~17~~
ieefleYe&lee& ØeYeg: mee#eer efveJeeme: MejCeb megùled~
ØeYeJe: ØeueÙe: mLeeveb efveOeeveb yeerpeceJÙeÙeced~~18
pitÂhamasya jagato mÂtÂ dhÂtÂ pitÂmahaÉ |vedyaØ pavitramoØkÂra riksÂma yajureva ca ||17||
gatirbhartÂ prabhuÉ sÂkîÍ nivÂsaÉ ïaraàaØ suhçt |
prabhavaÉ pralayaÉ sthÂnaØ nidhÂnaØ bÍjamavyayam ||18||

Chapter 9 257
the end, the fountainhead as well as that in whom all beings
are dissolved, and also the indestructible primal energy.??
Lord Krishn is the salvation that is the ultimate goal that everyone
wishes to attain to. As the witness who stands as an onlooker and
knows everything, he is the master of all beings. He is the imperishableprimal cause and he is also the doom (destruction) in whom all goodand evil are dissolved. He possesses all these glories. Moreover,
19. ?I am the sun that burns, I draw the clouds and also make
them rain, and, O Arjun, I am the essence of immortality as
well as death, and I am also both substance and shadow.??
He is the sun, the giver of light, and yet there are many worshipers
who regard him as unreal. Such men are victims of mortality.20. ?Men who do pious deeds enjoined by the three Ved, who
have tasted nectar and freed themselves from sin, and who
wish for heavenly existence through worshiping me by yagya,go to heaven (Indrlok) and enjoy godly pleasures as a rewardfor their virtuous acts.??
Although they practice all the three parts of worship - prayer (Rig),
equal conduct (Sam), and union (Yajur), partake of the dim light of the
moon, rid themselves of sin, and worship Lord Krishn by the prescribedmode of yagya; such men pray for the attainment of heaven because ofwhich they are rewarded with mortality and have to be reborn. Theyworship him and also adopt the appointed mode, but they beseech forheavenly joys in return. So rewarded for their piety they go to the abodeof Indr and enjoy the celestial pleasures of gods. Lord Krishn is thusalso the provider of these pleasures.
leheecÙencenb Je<eË efveie=þecÙeglme=peeefce Ûe~
Dece=leb ÛewJe ce=lÙeg§e meomeÛÛeencepeg&ve~~19~~
$ewefJeÅee ceeb meescehee: hetleheehee
Ùe%ewefj°dJee  mJeie&efleb  ØeeLe&Ùevles~les hegCÙeceemeeÅe  megjsvõueeskeâ-
ceëe>efvle efoJÙeeefvoefJe osJeYeesieeved~~20~~
tapÂmyahamahaØ varîaØ nigçhàÂmyutsçjÂmi ca |
amçtaØ caiva mçtyuïca sadasaccÂhamarjuna ||19||
traividyÂ mÂØ somapÂÉ pötapÂpÂ
yajáairiîòvÂ svargatiØ prÂrthayante |te puàyamÂsÂdya surendraloka-
maïnanti divyÂndivi devabhogÂn ||20||

Yatharth Geeta 258
les leb YegkeälJee mJeie&ueeskebâ efJeMeeueb
#eerCes hegCÙes celÙe&ueeskebâ efJeMeefvle~
SJeb        $eÙeerOece&cevegØeheVee
ieleeieleb keâecekeâecee ueYevles~~21~~DevevÙeeef§evleÙevlees ceeb Ùes pevee: heÙeg&heemeles~
les<eeb efvelÙeeefYeÙegòeâeveeb Ùeesie#esceb JenecÙenced~~22
ÙesÓhÙevÙeosJelee Yeòeâe Ùepevles ßeæÙeeefvJelee:~lesÓefhe ceecesJe keâewvlesÙe ÙepevlÙeefJeefOehetJe&keâced ~~2321. ?With the gradual wearing out of the merits of their piety,
they go back to the mortal world after enjoying the pleasures
of great heaven ; and it is thus that they  who seek refuge inthe desire-oriented action prescribed by the three Ved andcovet joy are condemned to repeated death and birth.?
The yagya they perform as well as its threefold means, prayer,
evenness of mind, and dedication that unites, is the same, and they
also seek refuge in Lord Krishn, but they have to undergo rebirth becauseof their desires. But their initial inspiration is never lost because theseed is not destroyed in the spiritual path. So it is of the utmostimportance that desire is thoroughly subdued. But what is the lot ofthose who are liberated from all desire?
22. ?I myself protect the yog of men who abide in me with steady
and undeviating faith and who worship me selflessly,
constantly remembering me as God.?
Lord Krishn himself bears the burden of the ardent worshiper?s
progress along the path of yog. He takes upon himself the responsibility
for the protection of his yog. Despite this, however, men are given toworshiping other gods.
23. ?Although even covetous devotees indeed worship me in
worshiping other gods, their worship is against the ordained
provision and therefore enveloped by ignorance.?
Yogeshwar Krishn has here for the second time taken up the
te taØ bhuktvÂ svargalokaØ viïÂlaØ
kîÍàe puàye martyalokaØ viïanti |
evaØ trayÍdharmamanuprapannÂ
gatÂgataØ kÂmakÂma labhante ||21||ananyÂïcintayanto mÂØ ye janÂÉ paryupÂsate |
teîÂØ nityÂbhiyuktÂnÂØ yogakîemaØ vahÂmyaham||22
ye'pyanyadevatÂ bhaktÂ yajante ïraddhayÂnvitÂÉ |te'pi mÂmeva kaunteya yajantyavidhipörvakam ||23||

Chapter 9 259
subject of other gods. It was in verses 20-23 of Chapter 7 that he first
told Arjun that deluded men whose wisdom is ravished by desires worshipother gods, and that there truly exist no such entities. It is Lord Krishnwho steadies and strengthens the faith of such worshipers in whateverit is inclined to, whether a Peepal tree, a piece of rock, some departedspirit, or a goddess. He is also the provider of their rewards. The fruitsof devotion are doubtlessly achieved by these worshipers, but therewards they obtain are momentary and ephemeral. They are here today,but they will be consumed tomorrow after they have been enjoyed.They wear out, whereas the rewards of the true worshipers of LordKrishn are never destroyed. So it is only the ignorant who have beenrobbed of their wisdom by desire that worship other gods.
In verses 23-25 of the present chapter, Yogeshwar Krishn
reiterates that they who adore other gods also really worship him, buttheir worship is improper because this form of devotion is not ordained.There is no power-like gods and to endeavour to realize them is,therefore, like striving for the unreal. But what exactly is wrong with theworship of other gods if it is in fact a worship of Lord Krishn himself andalso a begetter of rewards? Lord Krishn answers the question thus:
24. ?They have to undergo rebirth because they are ignorant of
the reality that I am the enjoyer, as well as the master of all
yagya.??
Lord Krishn is the enjoyer of yagya because whatever is offered
as sacrifice is dissolved in him. He is the blessedness that results from
yagya and also the master of the sacred rite. But they who do not knowthis fall from grace. They are destroyed, sometimes caught in the trapof worship of other gods and sometimes in the web of their own desires.Until they have perceived the essence, they are deprived even of theeverlasting fulfillment of their desires. What ultimately becomes of themis disclosed in the following verse:
Denb efn meJe&Ùe%eeveeb Yeesòeâe Ûe ØeYegjsJe Ûe~
ve leg ceeceefYepeeveefvle leòJesveele§ÙeJeefvle les~~24~~
ahaØ hi sarvayajáÂnÂØ bhoktÂ ca prabhureva ca |na tu mÂmabhijÂnanti tattvenÂtaïcyavanti te ||24||

Yatharth Geeta 260
Ùeeefvle  osJe?elee  osJeeefvhele¸vÙeeefvle  efhele=?elee:~
Yetleeefve Ùeeefvle YetlespÙee Ùeeefvle ceÅeeefpeveesÓefhe ceeced~~25
he$eb heg<heb Heâueb leesÙeb Ùees ces YekeälÙee ØeÙeÛÚefle~
leonb  YekeälÙegheùleceëe>eefce  ØeÙeleelceve:~~26~~Ùelkeâjesef<e Ùeoëe>eefme Ùeppegnesef<e ooeefme Ùeled~
ÙeòehemÙeefme keâewvlesÙe lelkegâ®<Je ceohe&Ceced~~27~~25. ?Men who are devoted to gods attain to gods, worshipers of
ancestors attain to their ancestors, worshipers of beings attain
to the state of beings, and my worshipers attain to me.?
Rather than really attaining to gods because they are nonexistent,
their worshipers just delude themselves with fancies. They who practice
ancestor-worship are trapped in the abyss of the past. Worshipers ofbeings end up in mortal bodies. But they who are single-mindedlydedicated to Lord Krishn attain to him. Although yet in their mortal bodies,they truly become him. That is the identity of the worshiper with theadored God. And such worshipers never come to grief. Moreover, eventhe mode of this worship of Lord Krishn is so simple:
26. ?I lovingly accept the offerings of leaves, flowers, fruit, and
water the selfless worshiper makes to me with true devotion.?This loving acceptance by Lord Krishn of whatever offering is
made to him by the earnest and devoted worshiper is the commencement
of devout reverence. Therefore,-
27. ?You should, O son of Kunti, dedicate to me whatever you
do, eat, offer as sacrifice, give as alms, and also your
penance.??
Lord Krishn will bear the responsibility for guarding the sphere of
Arjun?s yog if he performs all his deeds, from the humble act of eating
to the mortification of his mind and senses to shape them in accordancewith the nature of his quest, with a sense of total resignation.
yÂnti devavratÂ devÂnpitéyÂnti pitçvratÂÉ |
bhötÂni yÂnti bhötejyÂ yÂnti madyÂjino'pi mÂm ||25
patraØ puîpaØ phalaØ toyaØ yo me bhaktyÂ prayacchati|
tadahaØ bhaktyupahçtamaïnÂmi prayatÂtmanaÉ ||26||yatkaroîi yadaïnÂsi yajjuhoîi dadÂsi yat |
yattapasyasi kaunteya tatkuruîva madarpaàam ||27||

Chapter 9 261
MegYeeMegYeHeâuewjsJeb  cees#Ùemes  keâce&yevOevew:~
meVÙeemeÙeesieÙegòeâelcee efJecegòeâes ceeceghew<Ùeefme~~28~~
meceesÓnb meJe&Yetles<eg ve ces És<ÙeesÓefmle ve efØeÙe:~Ùes Yepeefvle leg ceeb YekeälÙee ceefÙe les les<eg ÛeehÙenced~~29
Deefhe ÛeslmegogjeÛeejes Yepeles ceecevevÙeYeekeâd~
meeOegjsJe me cevleJÙe: mecÙeiJÙeJeefmelees efn me:~~30~~28. ?Possessed thus of the yog of renunciation by the sacrifice
of all your acts, you will be freed from good as well as evil
fruits which are the shackles of action, and attain to me.??
In the above three verses, Lord Krishn has systematically dealt
with the means of accomplishment and its outcome. The three suggested
ways are: first, offering of humble gifts such as leaves and flowers, fruit,and water with total devotion; secondly, performance of action with asense of dedication, and; lastly, complete renunciation in the spirit ofself-surrender. By practicing them Arjun will be doubtlessly freed fromthe bonds of action and by this liberation he will attain to the sublimestate of Lord Krishn. The terms ?liberation? and ?achievement? asemployed here complement each other. Lord Krishn then speaks aboutthe profit that will accrue from the worshiper?s attainment of his state.
29. ?Although l abide evenly in all beings and there is no one who
is either dear or hateful to me, worshipers who contemplate
me with loving devotion abide in me and I in them.?
Lord Krishn pervades all beings in an equal way, but he has a
special relationship with his wholly dedicated worshipers, for they live
in him and he in them. This is the only kinship he knows. The worshiper?smind and heart overflow with Lord Krishn?s presence and there is thenno difference between the one and the other. Does it mean, however,that only the most fortunate are privileged to undertake this act of divineadoration? In Yogeshwar Krishn?s words:
30. ?Even if a man of the most depraved conduct worships me
incessantly, he is worthy of being regarded as a saint because
he is a man of true resolve.?
ïubhÂïubhaphalairevaØ mokîyase karmabandhanaiÉ|
sannyÂsayogayuktÂtmÂ vimukto mÂmupaiîyasi ||28||
samo'haØ sarvabhöteîu na me dveîyo'sti na priyaÉ |ye bhajanti tu mÂØ bhaktyÂ mayi te teîu cÂpyaham||29
api cetsudurÂcÂro bhajate mÂmananyabhÂk |
sÂdhureva sa mantavyaÉ samyagvyavasito hi saÉ ||30||

Yatharth Geeta 262
ef#eØeb YeJeefle Oecee&lcee MeÕeÛÚeefvleb efveieÛÚefle~
keâewvlesÙe Øeefle peeveerefn ve ces Yeòeâ: ØeCeMÙeefle~~31~~
ceeb efn heeLe& JÙeheeefßelÙe ÙesÓefhe mÙeg: heeheÙeesveÙe:~
ef?eÙees JewMÙeemleLee MetõemlesÓefhe Ùeeefvle hejeb ieefleced~~32If even a man of evil deeds remembers and adores Lord Krishn
with a single-minded devotion, believing that no object or god besides
Lord Krishn is worthy of worship, he is fit to be thought of as a sage. Heis not yet a saint, but there is at the same time not even the least doubtof his becoming one, for he has devoted himself to the task with realdetermination. So everyone, you and I all, whatever be the circumstanceof our birth, are entitled to the act of worship. The only condition is thatthe worshiper is a human, because man alone is capable of true resolve.Geeta is meant for the upliftment of sinners, as Lord Krishn says?
31. ?Thus he soon grows pious and achieves eternal peace, and
so, O son of Kunti, you should know beyond any doubt that
my worshiper is never destroyed.?
If engaged in devotional contemplation, even a wicked man soon
grows righteous, becomes one with the almighty God, and realizes the
ultimate, imperishable repose. Arjun is told to keep it in mind that LordKrishn?s earnest devotee is never destroyed. Even if the effort somehowgrows feeble, in the next life it is resumed from the very point at whichit was discontinued earlier and, beginning with what was done before,the worshiper presently attains to the most sublime peace. Therefore,all men of virtuous as well as of unrighteous conduct and all othershave the right to contemplate and adore. More than this,-
32. ?Since women, Vaishy and Shudr, and even those whose
births are regarded as inferior, attain, O Parth, to the supreme
goal by taking refuge in me...??
Throwing light upon demoniacal nature, Lord Krishn points out in
verses 7-21 of Chapter 16 that they who give up sacred precepts and
only pray for namesake out of conceit are the most despicable amongmen. They who make vain prayers which are but only nominally yagya
kîipraØ bhavati dharmÂtmÂ ïaïvacchÂntiØ nigacchati|
kaunteya prati jÂnÍhi na me bhaktaÉ praàaïyati ||31||
mÂØ hi pÂrtha vyapÂïritya ye'pi syuÉ pÂpayonayaÉ |
striyo vaiïyÂstathÂ ïödrÂste'pi yÂnti parÂØ gatim ||32||

Chapter 9 263
eEkeâ hegveyeÇe&ÿeCee: hegCÙee Yeòeâe jepe<e&ÙemleLee~
DeefvelÙecemegKeb ueeskeâefceceb ØeehÙe YepemJe ceeced~~33are cruel and sinful. ?Vaishy?  and ?Shudr? stand for, as we have seen,
only different stages of the path that leads to God. Women have beensometimes honoured and sometimes denigrated, but they as well asVaishy and Shudr have an equal right to the performance of yog. So theteaching of Geeta is for entire mankind, for all men, irrespective of theirconduct and circumstance of birth. It instructs all of us without anydiscrimination in what is propitious. The Geeta thus embodies a universalmessage.
33. ?It hardly needs saying that since pious Brahmin and royal
sages (rajarshi) attain to salvation, you should always engage
in my worship after getting the rare human body which isnaturally afflicted with pain and suffering and is ephemeraltoo.?
Let alone those men and women in the Brahmin and Kshatriy
rajarshi stages, ultimate absolution is within the reach of devotees  in
the stage of Vaishy, and Shudr as well. Brahmin is but a particularstage of spiritual growth which is blessed with all the virtues that leadthe individual Soul to the Supreme Spirit. That which incorporates themerits of peace, humble beseeching, perception, contemplation, andreadiness to follow the signs from the worshiped God is the state ofBrahmin. A Kshatriy who has been elevated to a sage by his pious lifeand austere devotion is endowed with the spirit of accomplishment,prowess, sense of authority, and a natural reluctance to withdraw fromthe undertaken enterprise. The yogi who have arrived at this stage ofyog, it is needless to say, surely succeed in completing their journey.So Arjun, too, should renounce this joyless and transient human bodyto devote himself to Lord Krishn?s worship.
It is for the fourth time that Lord Krishn has spoken here of the
four varn-Brahmin, Kshatriy, Vaishy, and Shudr. He has said in Chapter2 that there is no more profitable way than war for a Kshatriy; and
kiØ punarbrÂhmaàÂÉ puàyÂ bhaktÂ rÂjarîayastathÂ |
anityamasukhaØ lokamimaØ prÂpya bhajasva mÂm ||33||

Yatharth Geeta 264
subsequently added in Chapter 3 that even dying for one?s   inherent
dharm is more desirable. In Chapter 4 he said that he is the creator ofthe four varn. It is meant by this, as it has been repeatedly stressed,that he has divided action into four phases on the basis of their innateproperties. Performance of yagya is the one appointed task and theywho do it belong to four categories. At the point at which a worshiper isinitiated into the way, he is a Shudr because of his inadequate knowledge.When he has developed a partial capacity for accomplishment andaccumulated some spiritual wealth, the same worshiper turns into aVaishy. Ascending yet higher and acquiring the strength to carve hisway through the three properties of nature, he becomes a worshiper ofthe Kshatriy class. And the same worshiper is elevated to the rank of aBrahmin when he is infused with the qualities that unite the Soul withGod. Kshatriy and Brahmin worshipers are nearer to attainment thanthe Vaishy and Shudr. Since even the latter are assured of the finalbliss, there is hardly any need to speak anything of the lot of worshiperswho have achieved a higher status.
Also, the Upanishad, of which the Geeta is an abstract, abound
in allusions to women who were endowed with the sublime knowledgeof God. Even all the strenuous but futile attempts to codify the rightsand prohibitions derived from the spiritually timid and conventional studyof the part of Ved known as the Work cannot make us ignore theunambiguous assertion by Lord Krishn that women as well as men canalso participate in the ordained action of performing the worship that isnamed yagya. So it is but proper that his last words to Arjun in thechapter are words of encouragement for carrying out the deed of worshipwith firm devotion.
34. ?If, taking refuge in and with a total devotion of the Self to
me, you contemplate, remember with humble reverence, and
worship only me (Vasudev), you will attain to me.?
cevcevee YeJe ceÆòeâes ceÅeepeer ceeb vecemkegâ®~
ceecesJew<Ùeefme ÙegkeälJewJeceelceeveb celhejeÙeCe:~~34
manmanÂ bhava madbhakto madyÂjÍ mÂØ namaskuru|mÂmevaiîyasi yuktvaivamÂtmÂnaØ matparÂyaàaÉ ||34

Chapter 9 265
Remembering none except Lord Krishn and restraining the mind
from having any thought that is not of him, firm devotion, incessant
meditation and recital with humble reverence, and a total absorption  ofthe Soul in him, are the prerequisite for Arjun as well as any otherworshiper?s realizing the immutable, eternal Supreme Spirit within him.
???????????????
Addressing Arjun as a sinless devotee, Lord Krishn has told him
at the beginning of the chapter that he would elaborate and demonstrateto him the mysterious knowledge of God, blessed with which he wouldbreak with this world of misery, and after knowing which there will remainnothing else for him to know. With this knowledge he will be liberatedfrom the bonds of the world. So this knowledge is the king of all learning.Real knowledge is that which provides access to the Supreme Spiritand is surely propitious. It is also ?secret teaching? because it revealsthe inscrutable magnificence of God.
It is transparently fruitful, easy of practice, and imperishable. If
we succeed in practicing even a little of it, it brings freedom from thegreat fear of recurrent birth and death. Practiced in even a small measure,the merit earned from it is never destroyed and by virtue of it the doersucceeds in finally arriving at the supreme goal. But there is a conditionto this attainment. Rather than achieve the final bliss, the man who isdevoid of faith gropes about in the vicious maze of worldly life.
Yogeshwar Krishn has also in the chapter discoursed on the
greatness of yog. Getting away from the fraternity of grief is yog. Thatwhich is completely rid of both attachment and aversion to the world isyog. Yog is the name of union with the sublime essence that God is.Attainment to that God is the culmination of yog. Arjun has been told tokeep in mind the authority of the sage who has been initiated into yog.Since Lord Krishn is such a yogi, although he is the creator and sustainerof all beings, his Spirit Is not in them. He dwells in the identical SupremeSpirit and so he has become him. As the wind sweeping through thesky cannot sully its brightness, even so, although all beings are withinLord Krishn, he is unattached to them.

Yatharth Geeta 266
Lord Krishn shapes and refines beings with special care at the
beginning of kalp and at its completion all these beings attain to his
innate nature or, in other words, to the yog-endowed sage?s way of lifeand unmanifest existence. Such a sage goes beyond the sway of natureafter the moment of perception and yet, although constantly dwelling inhis Self, he works for the good of mankind. This is the sage?s way oflife and the conduct of this way of life is the nature of a sage.
While Lord Krishn is the Creator who stirs beings to Self-
improvement, the other creator is the three-propertied nature which inassociation with him brings forth the world of the animate and theinanimate. This, too, is kalp that is characterized by a constant changeof bodies, of properties, and of time. Goswami Tulsidas has representedthe same as that fathomless, dark pit of worldly life in which all beingslie in wickedness and terrible misery. Nature is divided into knowledgeand ignorance. Ignorance is evil and sorrowful and, helplessly spurredby it, a being dwells like a prisoner. Thwarted by ignorance, he is hemmedin by time, action, and the natural properties. Opposed to it is the yog-maya, the maya of knowledge, of which Lord Krishn himself is theCreator. It is this yog-maya that fashions the world and the propertiesof nature are dependent upon this power. The quality of doing goodbelongs to God alone. While there is no excellence in nature which isnot perishable, it is the awareness of God in knowledge that stirs beingsto strive towards his state of perfection.
Thus there are two kinds of kalp. One of them is the cycle of
change of object, body, and time-rendered by nature in conjunction withLord Krishn. But the other higher kalp, which bestows refinement on theSoul, is fashioned by accomplished sages; it is they who instillconsciousness into the inert nature of beings. Commencement of worshipis the beginning of this kalp, whereas the successful completion ofworship marks its close, with which the malady of worldly misery iscured and replaced by a total absorption in God. At this point the yogiattains to Lord Krishn?s way of life as well as state. The sage?s way oflife after attainment is his nature.

Chapter 9 267
Sacred texts tell us that a kalp is completed only with the passing
away of the four ages (yug), after which there is the phenomenon of
total dissolution known as doom. This is, however, a misrepresentationof the truth. Yug also means ?two.? Yug-dharm
1 persists so long as we
are away from the worshiped God and he is away from us. GoswamiTulsidas has referred to this in the ?Uttar Kand? of his Ram Charit Manas.So long as the property of ignorance and darkness (tamas) predominatesand there is only as insignificant presence of rajas, there are maliceand contradictions all around. A man living in this state may be said tobelong to Kaliyug. He is unable to contemplate God and worship him.But there is a change of age, of yug, with the commencement of worship.Now the property of rajas begins to grow, tamas is gradually weakened,and there emerge even some traces of sattwa in the worshiper?sdisposition. This is the stage at which he swings between happinessand fear, and with this the worshiper enters into the second age ofDwapar. Gradually, then, as the property of sattwa grows plentiful andonly a little of rajas remains, the inclination to the act of worship growsprogressively stronger. This is the third age, Treta, in which the worshiperpractices renunciation through the performance of yagya. At this pointthere is inculcated in him the capacity for recitation at the level of yagya,whose strength and weakness, rise and fall, depend upon the control ofbreath. When only sattwa remains and all conflicts are overcome, andalong with this there is poise of mind, there is then the age ofachievement-the domination of Satyug. At this stage the yogi?sknowledge is on the verge of transformation into practical experiencebecause he is now close to perfection. Now he has the capacity tospontaneously hold himself in the state of meditation.
Men of discrimination understand the changes, the rise and fall,
of yug-dharm. They give up unrighteousness to restrain the mind andengage in piety. When the restrained mind, too, is dissolved, the kalpalong with its different ages comes to a close. After bringing about theunion with perfection, the kalp also ceases. This is the ?doom? in which
1. See the exposition of verse 8 in chapter 4.

Yatharth Geeta 268
nature is dissolved in the Soul. After this, the sage?s way of life is his
innate quality-his nature.
Yogeshwar Krishn has then told Arjun that ignorant men do not
know him. They regard even him, the God of gods, as of no importanceand as a mere mortal. This ironic situation of being ignored bycontemporaries has faced every great sage. They have even beencastigated and Lord Krishn was no exception to this. Although he dwellsin the Supreme Being he has a human body, because of which theignorant contemptuously address him as a trivial mortal. The hopesand actions and knowledge of such men are all futile. They are theones who erroneously believe that they are doers of selfless action justby saying that they are so, irrespective of whatever they do. Thesemen of demoniacal inclination are unable to recognize the reality ofLord Krishn. But they who have acquired the treasure of divinity knowand worship him. They always think of and remember his excellence.
There are two ways of intense devotion of the one true action.
The first is the yagya of knowledge, the way on which the worshipertreads relying upon his own strength and after a careful review of hiscapacity. The other way is that on which the worshiper views therelationship between God and himself as akin to that between masterand servant, and in which the prescribed action is entered upon with asense of surrender to the accomplished teacher. These are the twopoints of view with which people worship Lord Krishn. But the yagyathey accomplish, the sacrifices they make, the performer, and the faith-the remedy that cures the malady of worldly existence, are all LordKrishn himself. He is also the supreme goal that the worshiper aims atachieving at last.
This yagya is performed by means of prayer, rituals, and
procedures that are designed to bring about equanimity in the practitioner.There are worshipers, however, who adopt these means but desireheaven in return, and that is what Lord Krishn bestows upon them. Bythe dint of their pious acts they dwell in the celestial world of Indr andenjoy it for long. But when the earned merit is gradually worn out, they

Chapter 9 269
have to come back to the mortal world and undergo re-birth. Their action
was right and yet they are condemned to recurrent birth because oftheir desire. So total liberation from desire is a primary necessity. Theyog of those who remember and contemplate Lord Krishn with perfectconcentration, with the feeling that there is nothing else to desire excepthim, and in whose act of worship there is not even the least flaw, isprotected by Lord Krishn himself.
Despite all this, men worship other gods. In fact, in worshiping
even other gods they worship Lord Krishn himself, but this mode ofworship is not ordained. They are unaware that he is the enjoyer of theiryagya- their sacrifices and so, although they worship, they fail to realizehim. They thus fail in their quest. They only succeed in attaining to thefancied forms of gods, beings, and ancestors, whereas men who aretruly devoted to Lord Krishn dwell directly in him and assume his ownbeing.
Lord Krishn has represented the act of yagya as easy to practice.
Whatever his worshipers offer him, he accepts. So Arjun is advised tosurrender all his devotional acts to Lord Krishn. When he is completelydetached, endowed with yog, and freed from the bonds of action, he willknow salvation which also is Lord Krishn himself.
All beings are his, but there is no one whom he loves and no one
whom he abhors. Yet, however, he dwells in his earnest devotee andthat devotee in him. Even the most wicked and sinful man who worshipshim with total dedication is worthy of being regarded as a saint, becausehis steady resolve will soon unite him with the Supreme Spirit and blesshim with eternal peace. Here Lord Krishn has made clear that whosoeveris pious, is a true follower of dharm. Any living being, who with single-minded devotion intones the single God, contemplates upon Him, shortlywill grow righteous. One who remembers the Single God is truly adevotee. A true devotee of Lord Krishn is never destroyed. Whether aShudr, a depraved man, an aborigine, looked down on by the conventionalculture, or one with whatever name he is known by,  or a man or awoman, or one who had demoniacal nature and lowly birth-they all attain

Yatharth Geeta 270
to the supreme glory if they take refuge in Lord Krishn and worship him
with firm intentness. So there is absolutely no doubt about the ultimatesalvation of those who have reached the stage of Brahmin and royalsages (rajarshi) who are well-endowed with virtues that unite the Soulwith God. Their final absolution is assured beyond any doubt, and soArjun too should always remember and be reverent to Lord Krishn. If heseeks shelter under him, he will attain to him and thus secure a statefrom which there is no going back.
Thus, in the present chapter, Lord Krishn has dwelt upon the
spiritual knowledge which he himself brings to the state of consciousness.This is the sovereign knowledge which is, after it has been onceawakened, doubtlessly propitious.
Thus concludes the Ninth Chapter, in the Upanishad of the
Shreemadbhagwadgeeta, on the knowledge of the Supreme
Spirit, the Science of Yog, and the Dialogue between
Lord Krishn and Arjun, entitled:
?Rajvidya Jagriti?
or
??Stirring to Spiritual Enlightenment??.
Thus concludes the Most Revered Paramhans Paramanand Ji?s
disciple Swami Adgadanand?s exposition of the Ninth Chapter of
the Shreemadbhagwadgeeta in ??Yatharth Geeta??, entitled:
?Rajvidya Jagriti?.
HARI OM TAT SAT

Chapter 10 271
CHAPTER 10
AN ACCOUNT OF
GOD?S GLORY
In the last chapter Lord Krishn revealed the mysterious and
definitely propitious knowledge that is the monarch of all knowledge. In
Chapter 10, he again takes up the subject and asks Arjun to listen tohim carefully. But what is the need of repeating something that hasalready been elucidated? The seeker is, in fact, imperfect right till themoment of attainment. The fabric of nature wears thinner as he is moreand more absorbed in his contemplation of God, and fresh visions appearbefore him one after the other. This is made possible through a sage?s-an accomplished teacher?s guidance. He does not and cannot knowthem by himself. In the absence of such a direction the worshiper willbe deprived of the attainment of God. So long as he is even slightlyremoved from his ultimate goal, it is evident that a crust of nature stillendures and there is an apprehension of his slipping and stumbling.Arjun is a disciple who has come under Lord Krishn?s shelter. He hasbegged the Yogeshwar to support him as he is his pupil who dependson him. So, for the sake of this earnest and submissive disciple, LordKrishn speaks again on what he has already discoursed on in Chapter 9.
1. ??The Lord said, ?Listen again, O the mighty-armed, to the
mystic and compelling words I am about to speak because
of my concern for the good of a beloved pupil.???
2. ?Neither gods nor great sages know my origin, for I am the
primal Source from which all of them have arisen.?
ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
YetÙe SJe ceneyeenes ëe=Ceg ces hejceb JeÛe:~
ÙeòesÓnb ØeerÙeceeCeeÙe Je#Ùeeefce efnlekeâecÙeÙee~~1~~
ve ces efJeog: megjieCee: ØeYeJeb ve cen<e&Ùe:~Denceeefoefn& osJeeveeb cen<eeaCeeb Ûe meJe&Me:~~2~~ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-bhöya eva mahÂbÂho ïçàu me paramaØ vacaÉ |
yatte'haØ prÍyamÂàÂya vakîyÂmi hitakÂmyayÂ ||1||
na me viduÉ suragaàÂÉ prabhavaØ na maharîayaÉ |ahamÂdirhi devÂnÂØ maharîÍàÂØ ca sarvaïaÉ ||2||

Yatharth Geeta 272
Ùees  ceecepeceveeefob Ûe Jesefòe ueeskeâcensÕejced~
Demeccet{: me celÙex<eg meJe&heehew: ØecegÛÙeles~~3~~
yegefæ%ee&vecemecceesn: #ecee melÙeb oce: Mece:~
megKeb og:Keb YeJeesÓYeeJees YeÙeb ÛeeYeÙecesJe Ûe~~4~~Deefnbmee mecelee legef°mlehees oeveb ÙeMeesÓÙeMe:~
YeJeefvle YeeJee Yetleeveeb ceòe SJe he=LeefiJeOee:~~5~~Lord Krishn also declared earlier that since his origin and action
are both celestial, they cannot be seen by physical eyes. So his
manifestation goes unnoticed even by men who have reached the spirituallevel of gods and sages. On the other hand, however,-
3. ?The wise man among mortals, who knows my reality as the
birthless, eternal, and supreme God of the entire world, is
freed from all sins.??
The man who knows this is a man of true wisdom. In other words,
a clear awareness of the omnipresent, eternal God is the knowledge
that liberates one from sin and rebirth. This achievement too is a giftfrom Lord Krishn:
4-5. ?All the manifold qualities with which beings are endowed:
will, knowledge, freedom from delusion, forgiveness, truth,
restraint of senses and mind, happiness and unhappiness,creation and destruction, fear and fearlessness, as well asabstinence from the desire to harm, equanimity of mind,contentment, penance, charity, fame, and ignominy-areprovided by none but me.??
Firmness of purpose, knowledge, dedication to the goal,
suppression of the mind and senses, inner happiness, the pains of the
spiritual way, awakening of God within the Self, total dissolution at themoment of realization, fear of the disciplining power of God, fearlessnessof nature, conduct that does not degrade, equanimity in which there areno conflicts, contentment, penance in keeping with the needs of thegoal, self-abnegation, and putting up equally with both honour and
yo mÂmajamanÂdiØ ca vetti lokamaheïvaram |
asammöÅhaÉ sa martyeîu sarvapÂpaiÉ pramucyate ||3||
buddhirjáÂnamasammohaÉ kîamÂ satyaØ damaÉ ïamaÉ |
sukhaØ duÉkhaØ bhavo'bhÂvo bhayaØ cÂbhayameva ca ||4||ahiØsÂ samatÂ tuîòitapo dÂnaØ yaïo'yaïaÉ |
bhavanti bhÂvÂ bhötÂnÂØ matta eva pçthagvidhÂÉ ||5||

Chapter 10 273
cen<e&Ùe:  mehle  hetJex  ÛelJeejes  ceveJemleLee~
ceÆeJee ceevemee peelee Ùes<eeb ueeskeâ Fcee: Øepee:~~6~~Sleeb efJeYetefleb Ùeesieb Ûe cece Ùees Jesefòe leòJele:~
meesÓefJekeâchesve Ùeesiesve ÙegpÙeles vee$e mebMeÙe:~~7~~humiliation on God?s way-all these propensities are-of Lord Krishn?s
making. These are the qualities that characterize the way of divinecontemplation. In their absence there remains only the ill-gotten hoardof devilish instincts.
6. ?The seven great sages, the four who had been earlier than
them, as well as Manu and others from whom all mankind
has sprung, have all been shaped by the operation of mywill.??
The seven great sages or rather the seven successive stages of
yog-virtuous aspiration, discrimination, refinement of spirit, inclination
to truth, disinterestedness, advancement on the spiritual path towardsunion with God and along with them the moulding of the four faculties ofmind, intellect, thought and ego in accordance with the demands ofyog, are all creations of Lord Krishn?s will. That is to say that they allarise from the determination to realize him. Each of them complementsthe other. All these components of the treasure of divinity are LordKrishn?s works. This treasure is dependent on the evolution of the sevensteps of yog and without them it cannot be.
7. ?The one who knows the reality of my exalted magnificence
and the might of my yog doubtless partakes of my nature by
becoming one with me through meditation.?
The man who learns of the excellence of yog and the glories of
Lord Krishn by direct perception is united with him and abides in him.
There is not even the least doubt about this. The steady, untremblingflame of a lamp where there is no wind is an apt illustration of thesubdued mind of a yogi. ?Avikampen? in the verse refers to such ananalogy.
maharîayaÉ sapta pörve catvÂro manavastathÂ |
madbhÂvÂ mÂnasÂ jÂtÂ yeîÂØ loka imÂÉ prajÂÉ ||6||etÂØ vibhötiØ yogaØ ca mama yo vetti tattvataÉ |
so'vikampena yogena yujyate nÂtra saØïayaÉ ||7||

Yatharth Geeta 274
Denb  meJe&mÙe  ØeYeJees  ceòe:  meJeË  ØeJele&les~
Fefle celJee Yepevles ceeb yegOee YeeJemeceefvJelee:~~8
ceefÛÛeòee ceûleØeeCee yeesOeÙevle: hejmhejced~
keâLeÙevle§e ceeb efvelÙeb leg<Ùeefvle Ûe jceefvle Ûe~~9les<eeb meleleÙegòeâeveeb Yepeleeb ØeereflehetJe&keâced~
ooeefce yegefæÙeesieb leb Ùesve ceecegheÙeeefvle les~~108. ?Aware of the reality that I am the source of all creation as
also the motive that stirs it to effort, and possessed of faith
and devotion, wise men remember and worship only me.??
It is at Lord Krishn?s behest that the entire world is spurred to
action. This implies that he is also the doer of whatever yogi do in
keeping with his nature. All the yogi?s endeavours are thus only blessingsfrom him. How it is so has been illuminated earlier. And now Lord Krishndwells upon how yogi constantly adore him.
9. ??They who anchor their minds on me, sacrifice their breath
to me, and are contented with speaking only of my greatness
among themselves, always dwell in me.??
Men who devote their minds to Lord Krishn alone without thinking
of anything other than him and who dedicate themselves to him heart
and soul are always conscious of his ways. They are happy singinghymns of praise of his glories and always abide in him.
10. ?I bestow upon the devotees, who always remember me and
adore me with love, that discipline of yog by learning which
they attain to none but me.??
So the awakening of yog in worshipers is also a gift from God; it
depends upon his assuming the role of a charioteer. The following verse
points to the way by which a sage and noble teacher like Lord Krishnblesses his devotee with the knowledge that initiates him into yog.
ahaØ sarvasya prabhavo mattaÉ sarvaØ pravartate |
iti matvÂ bhajante mÂØ budhÂ bhÂvasamanvitÂÉ ||8||
maccittÂ madgataprÂàÂ bodhayantaÉ parasparam |
kathayantaïca mÂØ nityaØ tuîyanti ca ramanti ca ||9||teîÂØ satatayuktÂnÂØ bhajatÂØ prÍtipörvakam |
dadÂmi buddhiyogaØ taØ yena mÂmupayÂnti te ||10||

Chapter 10 275
11. ??To extend my grace to them, I dwell in their innermost being
and dispel the gloom of ignorance by the radiance of
knowledge.?
Lord Krishn stands inseparably by the worshiper?s Self as a
charioteer to destroy spiritual ignorance. Worship does not really
commence until, through a sage who has known God, the Supreme
Spirit himself has not come awake in the worshiper?s Soul and takenupon himself the task of guidance from one instant to another as also
of restraining and disciplining him, and escorting him safely across the
incongruities of nature. At this stage God begins to command from allsides. But at the beginning, it is through an accomplished sage that he
speaks. If a seeker is not fortunate enough to have such a sage as a
teacher, God?s voice is only faintly audible to him.
The charioteer, whether he is the only adorable or an accomplished
teacher, or God himself, is the same. When the charioteer has awakenedin the worshiper?s Self, his dictates are received in four ways. At firstthere is the experience that is related to gross breath: of the infusioninto it of a thought that was earlier not in it. When a worshiper sits in
meditation, he is confronted with a number of questions. When is his
mind going to be truly absorbed? To what extent is it already absorbed?When does his mind desire to escape from nature and when has it
strayed from the path? The answers to these questions are signaled
every moment by the adored God through physical reflexes. Twitchingof limbs is an experience related to gross breath and it appears
simultaneously at more than one point even within a moment. If the
mind has deviated, these signals are transmitted minute after minute.But these signals are received only if the devotee holds on to the form
of the worshiped Godlike teacher with undeviating firmness. Reflex
actions such as twitching of limbs are a much too frequent experienceof ordinary beings because of the clash between their contradictory
impulses, but these have nothing to do whatsoever with the signs that
les<eecesJeevegkeâcheeLe&cence%eevepeb    lece:~
veeMeÙeecÙeelceYeeJemLees %eeveoerhesve YeemJelee~~11~~
teîÂmevÂnukampÂrthamahamajáÂnajaØ tamaÉ |nÂïayÂmyÂtmabhÂvastho jáÂnadÍpena bhÂsvatÂ ||11||

Yatharth Geeta 276
are transmitted to worshipers who are wholly dedicated to the sublime
object of their worship.
The other experience is connected with the awakening of breath
in dreams. Ordinary men dream according to their desires, but when aworshiper cleaves to God even dreams are transformed into divineinstructions. Rather than dreaming, a yogi perceives the act of realitycoming into being.
These two experiences are both preliminary. Association with a
sage who has known reality, having faith in him, and rendering himeven a token service suffices to bring about these experiences. But thetwo subsequent experiences of a worshiper are more subtle and dynamic,and they can be had only through active practice-only by really walkingalong the path.
The third experience is that of awakening into profound sleep. All
of us in the world after all, as it were, lie immersed in slumber. We arebut lying in a state of insensibility in the dark night of ignorance. Andwhatever we do, day and night, is but a dream. Profound sleep hererefers to the condition that follows after the stage when the memory ofGod flows through the worshiper so very like a perennial stream that hisvision of God is permanently fixed in the mind. This is that serene andblessed mood in which the worshiper is led gently on by his affections,and in which, while the physical breath is suspended and he is laidasleep in body, he becomes ?a Living Soul.? This is the state of harmonyand of deep joy in which the worshiper is blessed with an insight intothe very life of things. In such a condition the worshiped God transmitsyet another signal, which manifests itself in the form of an image that isin consonance with the yogi?s prevailing mood and provides the correctdirection, thus acquainting him with the past and the present. My Reveredteacher would quite often tell us that even like the surgeon who firstrenders a patient unconscious and then cures him by the application ofa suitable remedy, God-when the flame of worship is strong and steady-imbues the devotee with awareness of the state of his faith and worshipto cure his spiritual sickness.

Chapter 10 277
Depeg&ve GJeeÛe-
hejb yeÇÿe hejb Oeece heefJe$eb hejceb YeJeeved~
heg®<eb MeeÕeleb efoJÙeceeefoosJecepeb efJeYegced~~12~~
DeengmlJeece=<eÙe:  meJex  osJeef<e&vee&jomleLee~Deefmelees osJeuees JÙeeme: mJeÙeb ÛewJe yeÇJeeref<e ces~~13The fourth and final experience is of the spiritual awakening that
leads to evenness of breath. This is the state in which the worshiper is
on par with that God whose thought he has fixed his mind on as on atangible object. This realization arises from within the Self and oncethis awakening has taken place, at every moment while sitting idly orup and active, the worshiper pre-visions occurrences that shall be andthus gains omniscience. This is the state, too, in which there arises asense of oneness with the embodied Self. This final experience isgenerated when the darkness of ignorance is dissipated by the light ofknowledge through the agency of a timeless and unmanifest sage whohas awakened in his Soul.
Arjun then speaks to Lord Krishn.
12-13. ?Arjun said, ?It has been so said by even divine sages such
as Narad, Asit, the sage Deval, and the great saint Vyas - thatyou are the radiant Being, supreme goal, and absolutelyunblemished, because all of them believe you to be theSupreme Spirit who is the primeval, birthless, and all-pervasive God of all gods; and now you tell me the same.???
?Radiant Being? and ?birthless? are synonyms for God and the
final state of perfect bliss. Arjun first refers to sages of the past who
said the same. And now even divine sages like Narad, Asit, Deval,Vyas, and Lord Krishn himself say it. The latter are all contemporariesof Arjun and he has the advantage of associating with these sages.And they all as well as Lord Krishn affirm what was declared by thesages of yore. So-
arjuna uvÂca-
paraØ brahma paraØ dhÂma pavitraØ paramaØ bhavÂn|
puruîaØ ïÂïvataØ divyamÂdidevamajaØ vibhum ||12||
ÂhustvÂmçîayaÉ sarve devarîirnÂradastathÂ |asito devalo vyÂsaÉ svayaØ caiva bravÍîi me ||13||

Yatharth Geeta 278
meJe&cesleÂleb cevÙes Ùevceeb Jeoefme kesâMeJe~
ve efn les YeieJevJÙeefòebâ efJeogoxJee ve oeveJee:~~14
mJeÙecesJeelceveelceeveb JeslLe lJeb heg®<eesòece~YetleYeeJeve  YetlesMe  osJeosJe  peielheles~~15~~
Jeòegâcen&mÙeMes<esCe  efoJÙee  ¢eelceefJeYetleÙe:~
ÙeeefYeefJe&YetefleefYeueexkeâeefveceebmlJeb JÙeehÙe efle?efme~~16keâLeb efJeÅeecenb ÙeesefiebmlJeeb meoe heefjefÛevleÙeved~
kesâ<eg kesâ<eg Ûe YeeJes<eg efÛevlÙeesÓefme YeieJevceÙee~~17
efJemlejsCeelcevees Ùeesieb efJeYetefleb Ûe peveeo&ve~YetÙe: keâLeÙe le=efhleefn& ëe=CJelees veeefmle cesÓce=leced~~1814. ?I believe, O Keshav, all that you have told me and which, O
Lord, is known to neither demons nor gods, to be true.??
And-
15. ?Which, O Supreme Lord, O Creator and God of all beings, O
God of gods and master of the world, is known to you alone.??This truth which is known to Lord Krishn, the creator of all beings
and their God, is also made known to those Souls who are awakened
and lit up by their consciousness of him. So the knowledge of worshipersis really his knowledge.
16. ?So you alone are capable of enlightening me well on your
glories by which you pervade and dwell in all the worlds.??Therefore-
17. ?How should I, O Yogeshwar, know you by incessant
contemplation and in what forms, O Lord, should I worship
you??
These questions are agitating Arjun?s mind. How should he know
Lord Krishn-a yogi, how should he meditate on him, and how should he
remember him?
18. ?And, O Janardan, tell me again the power of your yog and
your exalted magnificence, for I am not yet sated by the honey
of your utterances.??
sarvametadçtaØ manye yanmÂØ vadasi keïava |
na hi te bhagavanvyaktiØ vidurdevÂ na dÂnavÂÉ ||14||
svayamevÂtmanÂtmÂnaØ vettha tvaØ puruîottama |bhötabhÂvana bhöteïa devadeva jagatpate ||15||
vaktumarhasyaïeîeàa divyÂ hyÂtmavibhötayaÉ |
yÂbhirvibhötibhirlokÂnimÂØstvaØ vyÂpya tiîòhasi ||16||kathaØ vidyÂmahaØ yogiØstvÂØsadÂ paricintayan |
keîu keîu ca bhÂveîu cintyo'si bhagavanmayÂ ||17||
vistareàÂtmano yogaØ vibhötiØ ca janÂrdana |bhöyaÉ kathaya tçptirhi ïçàvato nÂsti me'mçtam ||18||

Chapter 10 279
ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
nvle les keâLeefÙe<Ùeeefce efoJÙee ¢eelceefJeYetleÙe:~ØeeOeevÙele: kegâ®ßes? veemlÙevlees efJemlejmÙe ces~~19
Denceelcee ieg[ekesâMe meJe&YetleeMeÙeefmLele:~
Denceeefo§e ceOÙeb Ûe Yetleeveecevle SJe Ûe~~20DeeefolÙeeveecenb efJe<CegpÙeexefle<eeb jefJejbMegceeved~
cejerefÛece&®leeceefmce  ve#e$eeCeecenb  MeMeer~~21Lord Krishn has stated briefly at the beginning of this chapter
what Arjun wants to know again. Arjun begs him to elaborate the same
again at greater length because his curiosity is not yet fully satisfied.Moreover, he also wishes to hear Lord Krishn?s words just for the sakeof listening to them. Such is the sweet charm of the speech of God andof sages. No wonder according to Goswami Tulsidas, one who is satiatedwith listening to the chronicle of Ram is bereft of sentiment.
Until the worshiper has access to the desired God, his thirst for
the substance of immortality remains. If someone sits down on the waybefore the point of attainment with the feeling that he knows all, he hasin fact known nothing. It is evident then that his progress is about to beobstructed. So it is the seeker?s duty that he holds on to directions fromthe adored God and turns them into practice.
19. ?The Lord then said, I shall now tell you of the power of my
glories, for there is no end to my diverse manifestations.??After this he sets out to enumerate some outstanding instances
of his numberless divine attributes.20. ?I am, O Gudakesh, the Self that dwells within all beings, as
also their primeval beginning, middle, and end.??In other words I am birth, death and life too.
21. ?I am Vishnu among the twelve sons of Aditi, the sun among
lights, the god Mareechi among winds, and the sovereign
moon among planets.??
Aditya and the other celestial beings referred to in the verse were
taken as symbols of certain inner attitudes in the time of Lord Krishn;
they are all dwellers in the sphere of the heart.
ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-
hanta te kathayiîyÂmi divyÂ hyÂtmavibhötayaÉ |prÂdhÂnyataÉ kuruïreîòha nÂstyanto vistarasya me ||19||
ahamÂtmÂ guÅÂkeïa sarvabhötÂïayasthitaÉ |
ahamÂdiïca madhyaØ ca bhötÂnÂmanta eva ca ||20||ÂdityÂnÂmahaØ viîàurjyotiîÂØ raviraØïumÂn |
marÍcirmarutÂmasmi nakîatrÂàÂmahaØ ïaïÍ ||21||

Yatharth Geeta 280
Jesoeveeb meeceJesoesÓefmce osJeeveeceefmce JeemeJe:~
FefvõÙeeCeeb ceve§eeefmce Yetleeveeceefmce Ûeslevee~~22~~®õeCeeb Me¿j§eeefmce efJeòesMees Ùe#ej#emeeced~
Jemetveeb heeJekeâ§eeefmce ces®: efMeKeefjCeecenced~~23~~
hegjesOemeeb Ûe cegKÙeb ceeb efJeefæ heeLe& ye=nmheefleced~mesveeveerveecenb mkeâvo: mejmeeceefmce meeiej:~~24~~22. ?I am also the Sam among the Ved, Indr among gods, the
mind among senses, and the consciousness in beings.?
Among the Ved, Lord Krishn is the Sam Ved, for it is he whose
song begets the state of equanimity. He is the Lord Indr among gods,
and the mind among senses for he is known only through restraint ofthe mind. He is also the power that gives beings their sense of awareness.
23. ?I am Shankar among Rudr
1, Kuber2 among demons and
yaksh3, fire among Vasu4, and the Sumeru among lofty
mountains.?Lord Krishn is Shankar among Rudr. Shankar-?shanka-ar??-may
be understood as the condition in which there are no doubts and
irresolutions. Among the yaksha and demons, Lord Krishn is the lord ofriches - Kuber; among the eight Vasu, He is the fire and among thepeaks, He is Sumeru which is combination of auspiciousness and themost elevated peak instead of any ordinary hill. In fact, ?Kuber,? ?Fire,?and ?Sumeru? are all metaphors for the discipline of yog; they are allyogic terms.
24. ?Be it known to you, Parth, that I am among priests the Chief
Priest Brihaspati, Skand
5 among martial chiefs, and the ocean
among seas.??
1. The name of a group of gods, eleven in number, because they dwell within the ten
senses and one mind, who are supposed to be inferior manifestations of Shiv or
Shankar, the head of the group.
2. The god of spiritual wealth
3. Demi-gods, described as attendants of Kuber.
4. A class of eight deities who constitute the human body.5. Another name of Kartikeya.vedÂnÂØ sÂmavedo'smi devÂnÂmasmi vÂsavaÉ |
indriyÂàÂØ manaïcasmi bhötÂnÂmasmi cetanÂ ||22||rudrÂàÂØ ïaßkaraïcÂsmi vitteïo yakîarakîasÂm |
vasönÂØ pÂvakaïcÂsmi meruÉ ïikhariàÂmaham ||23||
purodhasÂØ ca mukhyaØ mÂØ viddhi pÂrtha bçhaspatim|
senÂnÍnÂmahaØ skandaÉ sarasÂmasmi sÂgaraÉ ||24||

Chapter 10 281
cen<eeaCeeb  Ye=iegjnb  efiejecemcÙeskeâce#ejced~
Ùe%eeveeb peheÙe%eesÓefmce mLeeJejeCeeb efnceeueÙe:~~25~~DeÕelLe: meJe&Je=#eeCeeb osJe<eeaCeeb Ûe veejo:~
ievOeJee&Ceeb efÛe$ejLe: efmeæeveeb keâefheuees cegefve:~~26~~Among priests, who keep watch over the intellect that is like a
gateway to the human body, Lord Krishn is Brihaspati, the divine teacher
of gods themselves, and so it is he who generates the treasure ofdivinity. Among martial commanders he is Kartikeya, renunciation ofaction by which the destruction of animate and inanimate worlds, totaldissolution, and the final attainment of God are effected.
25. ?I am Bhrigu among the great saints (maharshi), OM among
words, the yagya of intoned prayers (jap-yagya) among yagya,
and the Himalaya among stationary objects.
Lord Krishn is Bhrigu among great sages. He is also OM, symbol
of the Supreme Spirit, among words. He is the jap-yagya among yagya.
Yagya is the image of that special form of worship that enables aworshiper to be united with God. In summary, therefore, it is remembranceof the Supreme Spirit and recitation of his name. When after havingcrossed the Stages of two kinds of speech, the audible and the muttered,the name reaches the stage of yagya, it is then recited by neitherarticulated speech nor from the throat; nor even in thought; it then infusesevery breath. There is then only a surging ahead unceasingly with thevision of mind in God engraved on every breath. The rise and fall, ascentand descent, of yagya, and its different stages depend upon breath. Itis something dynamic - a matter of action. Among stationary objects,Lord Krishn is the Himalaya, cool, even, and immovable like the oneGod himself. At the time of doom, it is said, Manu was joined with apeak of that mountain. The immutable, even, and tranquil God is neverdestroyed. Lord Krishn is deep awareness of that God.
26. ?I am Ashwath (the Peepal) among trees, Narad among divine
sages, Chitrarath among Gandharv, and the sage Kapil among
men of attainment.?
maharîÍàÂØ bhçgurahaØ girÂmasmyekamakîaram |
yajáÂnÂØ japayajáo'smi sthÂvarÂàÂØ himÂlayaÉ ||25||aïvatthaÉ sarvavçkîÂàÂØ devarîÍàÂØ ca nÂradaÉ |
gandharvÂàÂØ citrarathaÉ siddhÂnÂØ kapilo muniÉ ||26||

Yatharth Geeta 282
GÛÛew:ßeJemeceÕeeveeb efJeefæ ceecece=leesÆJeced~
SsjeJeleb iepesvõeCeeb vejeCeeb Ûe vejeefOeheced~~27~~DeeÙegOeeveecenb Je»eb Oesvetveeceefmce keâeceOegkeâd~
Øepeve§eeefmce keâvohe&: mehee&Ceeceefmce Jeemegefkeâ:~~28~~Lord Krishn is Ashwath, the holy Peepal among trees. The world,
which is not even sure of living until the symbolic tomorrow, is described
as an inverted Peepal tree whose root-God-is above and whose boughs-
nature-are spread below. This is not the ordinary Peepal tree that is
commonly worshiped. And it is in this sense that Lord Krishn calls
himself Peepal among trees. Narad (nadasy randhrah is Narad) has, on
the other hand, such a subtle awareness that he can steadily hold on to
the divine rhythm arising from breath. Among Gandharv Lord Krishn is
Chitrarath, or that unique state in which the object of contemplation
begins to be directly perceptible to the worshiper. Lord Krishn is the
sage Kapil among accomplished seers. Kapil is bodily manifestation in
its subtle form. When longing gets truly dissolved within inner realm,
such stage of divine flow is Lord Krishn himself.
27. ?Know (also) that I am the nectar-born Uchchaishrava among
horses, Airawat among pachyderms, and king among men.?Every object in the world is perishable and the Self alone is
indestructible. Lord Krishn is Uchchaishrava among horses which gets
impulses for setting in motion the quest for and by the immortal ?nectar-
like? Self. Self is immortal, constant and vital. A horse is a symbol of
regulated motion. Lord Krishn is the motion of the mind in its quest for
the reality of the Self. He is also king among men. A great soul is in fact
a king, because he wants for nothing.
28. ?I am Vajr among weapons, Kamdhenu among cows, Kamdev
for procreation, and Vasuki
6, the king of snakes.
Lord Krishn is the most formidable among weapons. Among cows
he is Kamdhenu. Kamdhenu is not a cow which serves appetizing
delicacies in place of milk. Among sages it was Vashisth who had
Kamdhenu. Symbolically, the word ?cow? stands for the senses. Restraint
6. Name of a celebrated serpent, king of snakes, said to be a son of Kashyap.uccaiÉïravasamaïvÂnÂØ viddhi mÂmamçtodbhavam |
airÂvataØ gajendrÂàÂØ narÂàÂØ ca narÂdhipam ||27||ÂyudhÂnamahaØ vajraØ dhenönÂmasmi kÂmadhuk |
prajanaïcÂsmi kandarpaÉ sarpÂàÂmasmi vÂsukiÉ ||28||

Chapter 10 283
Devevle§eeefmce veeieeveeb Je®Cees Ùeeomeecenced~
efhele¸CeeceÙe&cee Ûeeefmce Ùece: mebÙeceleecenced~~29~~of the senses is an attribute of the seeker who has learnt to grasp the
object of his worship. When he succeeds in moulding his senses intune with God, his senses themselves become a ?Kamdhenu? for him.
With this he attains to the stage when the attainment of God is by no
means beyond reach.
A seeker at this level finds nothing beyond his grasp. Lord Krishn
is also Kamdev for reproduction. However, the birth he effects is not
the physical birth of a male or female child. Such procreation, by both
animate and inanimate beings, goes on day and night. Even rats and
ants reproduce themselves. But the generation of new life by Lord Krishn
is the generation of new situations-change from one circumstance to
another-by which the inner propensities themselves are changed. Among
snakes, Lord Krishn is Vasuki, the celebrated king of snakes.
29. ?I am Sheshnag among the nag, the god Varun among beings
of water, Aryama am ong ancestors, and Yamraj among rulers.??
Lord Krishn is the infinite or ?Shesh nag.? Sheshnag is in fact no
snake. There is a description of its form in the composition called
Shreemad Bhagwat which is contemporaneous with the Geeta.
According to it, Sheshnag is an embodiment of God?s vaishnavi (Vishnu)
power which is stationed at a distance of thirty thousand yojan  from
the earth and on whose head the earth rests lightly like a grain of mustard.
This is, in truth, a picture of the force of gravity between objects which
keeps the stars and planets in their respective orbits. This force winds
itself around all of them and holds them like a snake. This is the infinite
that holds the earth, too. Lord Krishn says that he is that divine principle.
He is also Varun, the king of amphibious beings, and Aryama among
ancestors. Non-violence, truth, detachment, continence, and freedom
from doubt are the five yam, moral restraints and observances. ?Arah??
represents the cutting off of the aberrations that appear in the way of
their practice. Elimination of these evils brings to fulfillment the merits
of action done in a previous life, which then provides liberation from
anantaïcÂsmi nÂgÂnÂØ varuào yÂdasÂmaham |
pitéàÂmaryamÂ cÂsmi yamaÉ saØyamatÂmaham ||29||

Yatharth Geeta 284
Øe¥eo§eeefmce owlÙeeveeb keâeue: keâueÙeleecenced~
ce=ieeCeeb Ûe ce=iesvõesÓnb JewvelesÙe§e heef#eCeeced~~30~~
heJeve: heJeleeceefmce jece: Me?eYe=leecenced~Pe<eeCeeb cekeâj§eeefmce ?eeslemeeceefmce peeÖJeer~~31~~worldly bondage. Among rulers Lord Krishn is Yamraj, guardian of the
restraints called yam.
30. ?I am Prahlad among daitya (demons), unit of time for
reckoners, the lion (mrigendr) among beasts, and Garud
among birds.??
 Lord Krishn is Prahlad among demons. Prahlad (par + ahlad) is
joy for others. Love itself is Prahlad. Attraction to God and the impatience
to be one with him while one  is yet dwelling with demoniacal instinctsis a process that ultimately leads to perception.  Lord Krishn is thejoyous love of this union. He is also time among those who are given tocounting its units. This reckoning is really not of numbers and of divisionsof time. Lord Krishn is rather the progressive lengthening of time that isdevoted to the contemplation of God. He is the time of incessantremembrance of God not only in the hours of wakefulness but also insleep. Among beasts he is mrigendra, the lion or king of beasts, asymbol of the yogi who also roams about and rules in the forest of yog.Lord Krishn is also Garud among feathered creatures. Garud is k nowledge.
When the awareness of God begins to grow, the worshiper?s mind itselfturns into a vehicle of the adored God. On the other hand, the samemind is like a ?serpent? (sarp: an epithet of Garud) when it is infestedwith worldly desires, stinging and hurling Souls into the inferno of mortalbirths. Garud is Vishnu?s vehicle. When it is blessed with knowledge,the mind also turns into a vehicle on which is borne the  unmanifestSpirit that permeates every atom of the universe. So Lord Krishn is themind that holds and carries the worshiped God within itself.
31. ?I am the wind among powers that refine, Ram among armed
warriors, the crocodile among fishes, and the sacred
Bhagirathi Ganga among rivers.??
prahlÂdaïcÂsmi daityÂnÂØ kÂlaÉ kalayatÂmaham |
mçgÂàÂØ ca mçgendro'haØ vainateyaïca pakîiàÂm ||30
pavanaÉ pavatÂmasmi rÂmaÉ ïastrabhçtÂmaham |
jhaîÂàÂØ makaraïcÂsmi srotasÂmasmi jÂhnavÍ ||31||

Chapter 10 285
meiee&Ceeceeefojvle§e  ceOÙeb  ÛewJeencepeg&ve~
DeOÙeelceefJeÅee efJeÅeeveeb Jeeo: ØeJeoleecenced~~32
De#ejeCeecekeâejesÓefmce ÉvÉ: meeceeefmekeâmÙe Ûe~DencesJee#eÙe: keâeuees Oeeleenb efJeÕeleescegKe:~~33Lord Krishn is the invincible Ram among wielders of weapons.
Ram denotes one who rejoices. Yogi rejoice in knowledge. The signals
received from the God they worship are their sole pleasure. Ramsymbolizes that direct perception and Lord Krishn is that awareness.
He is also the mighty crocodile among amphibian beings and the
most sacred Ganga among rivers.
32. ?I am, O Arjun , the beginning and end and also the middle
of created beings, the mystic knowledge of Self among
sciences, and the final arbiter among disputants.??
Among branches of learning Lord Krishn is knowledge of the
Supreme Spirit (as well as of the relation between the Supreme and the
individual Soul). He is the knowledge that leads to the sovereignty ofthe Self. Dominated by maya, the vast majority are driven by passion,malice, time, action, disposition, and the three properties of nature.Lord Krishn is the knowledge that takes one from this slavery of thematerial world into the state in which the Self is in supreme command.This is the knowledge that is called adhyatm. He is also the final verdictthat resolves all disputes on the Supreme Spirit. What comes beyondthis is, it is needless to say, beyond arbitration.
33. ?I am the vowel akar among the letters of the alphabet,
dwandwa among compounds, the eternal Mahakal amidst
mutable time, and also the God who holds and sustains all.??
In the elevated stage of spiritual austerity, mind gets gradually
dissolved and the seeker remains only face to face with Adorable One.
It is a desireless state. But still there exists conflict between the seekerand Supreme Master, and this state of perplexity is a gift of God.
Besides being the first sound of the sacred OM, Lord Krishn is
also the imperishable, immutable time. Time is always changing, but
sargÂàÂmÂdirantaïca madhyaØ caivÂhamarjuna |
adhyÂtmavidyÂ vidyÂnÂØ vÂdaÉ pravadatÂmaham||32
akîarÂàÂmakÂro'smi dvandvaÉ sÂmÂsikasya ca |ahamevÂkîayaÉ kÂlo dhÂtÂhaØ viïvatomukhaÉ ||33||

Yatharth Geeta 286
he is that state-that time-which takes one to the eternal God. He is also
the Omnipresent Spirit (Virat Swarup) who pervades and sustains all.
34. ?I am the death that annihilates all, the root of the creations
to be, and Keerti among women-the embodiment of the
feminine qualities of accomplishing action (keerti) vitality,speech, memory, awareness (medha), patience andforgiveness.?
As Yogeshwar Krishn will say in the sixteenth verse of Chapter
15, all beings (Purush) are of only two kinds, the perishable and the
imperishable. All these bodies which generate other beings and die aremortal. Whether male or female, they are all Purush according to LordKrishn. The other Purush is the imperishable Cosmic Spirit who isperceived in the state when the mind has ceased to be. This is thereason why men and women equally can attain the supreme goal. Thequalities of vitality, memory, awareness, and so on pointed out in thethirtyfourth verse are all feminine in principle. Does it mean that menhave no need of these qualities? In truth, the animating principle of theheart?s sphere is a feminine principle. The qualities enumerated in theverse need to be inculcated in all hearts, of men as much as of women.
Parents make additional arrangements for the inculcation of these
very qualities among their intellectually weak children. Lord Krishn sayshere that these qualities are generally found in the female. But Arjunpossessing these qualities was a male. Arjun retreated in the beginningof battle, preferring to be slain by armed Kauravas instead of standingup and fighting with them. Lord Krishn counseled that if he did not fightthis spiritual ?war?, he would commit a sin, losing his Swadharm andpride. Opponents will remember your disgrace for a long time to come,Lord Krishn said, ill-reputation is worse than death for a respectableman. Lord Krishn has thus clearly advocated kirti (reputation) to beimportant for males also.
ce=lÙeg:   meJe&nj§eencegÆJe§e   YeefJe<Ùeleeced~
keâerefle&: ßeerJee&keäÛe veejerCeeb mce=eflecexOee Oe=efle: #ecee~~34
mçtyuÉ sarvaharaïcÂhamudbhavaïca bhaviîyatÂm |
kÍrtiÉ ïrÍrvÂkca nÂrÍàÂØ smçtirmedhÂ dhçtiÉ kîamÂ ||34||

Chapter 10 287
ye=nlmeece leLee meecveeb ieeÙe$eer Úvomeecenced~
ceemeeveeb ceeie&Meer<eexÓnce=letveeb kegâmegceekeâj:~~35~~At the end of the Geeta, Sanjay concluded that where there is
Yogeshwar Krishn and Parth (Arjun) - the great archer- there is ?shree?
(prosperity), victory, glory, and immutable uprightness or morality.Reputation, prosperity, glory - these are the feminine qualities, how canthey be associated with Arjun?
In chapter 15 verse 15, the Lord says: Arjun! I exist as the
omniscient presence in the heart of all beings. Intellect, memory, trueknowledge, and the capability of shunning vices, is my boon.
Actually the disposition of the fluctuating mind is of the feminine
nature. The body itself is nothing but a garment. The different gendersare the outer forms of the body, not of the Self. The inclinations in thebody naturally flow towards the material world. The sentiments of divinity,memory, discrimination, patience, forgiveness etc. are all imbued inthe inclinations or propensities of the mind by God Himself. Humanity,with the help of these qualities, attains prosperity and the SupremeGoal. Inculcation of these qualities is useful and necessary for maleand female both, because they lead to the attainment of prosperity inthe world and the Supreme Goal of life, which are blessings of LordKrishn.
35. ?And I am the Sam Ved among scriptural hymn, the  Gayatri
among metrical compositions, the ascendant Agrahayan
among months, and the spring among seasons.??
Among the sacred Vedic texts (Shruti) that are fit to be sung,
Lord Krishn is the Sam Ved (Vrihatsam), the song that produces
evenness of mind. He is the spiritual awakening in these hymns. He,too, is Gayatri among verses. The Gayatri, it is important to realize, isa metrical composition of self-denying prayer rather than a spell or charm,the recitation of which brings automatic salvation. After straying thrice,throwing himself at the mercy of the desired God, the sage Vishwamitraddressed him as the essence that permeates the earth, all the worlds,
bçhatsÂma tathÂ sÂmnÂØ gÂyatrÍ chandasÂmaham |
mÂsÂnÂØ mÂrgaïÍrîo'hamçtönÂØ kusumÂkaraÉ ||35||

Yatharth Geeta 288
and the Self, and entreated him to confer wisdom on him and to inspire
him so that he could know his reality. So, as it may be seen, Gayatri isa prayer. The worshiper is not able to resolve his doubts by his ownintelligence; he does not know when he is right or in error. So LordKrishn is the Gayatri by which  the hapless worshiper surrenders himselfto God. This prayer is doubtlessly propitious, for by this the devoteeseeks refuge in Lord Krishn. Lord Krishn is also Agrahayan amongmonths-the ascendant season of joy. With the progression of annihilationof sins, the austerity of spiritual path attains almost its peak in whichLord Krishn abides completely. He is the state of felicity that this monthresembles.
36. ?I am the deceit of cheating gamblers, the glory of renowned
men, the victory of conquerors, the determination of the
resolved, and the virtue of the pious.??
The idea of gambling in the verse refers to the fundamental
character of nature. Nature itself is a gambler and cheat. To forsake
outward show and engage in the way of private adoration to escapefrom the contradictions of nature is an act of ?deception.? But to call it?deception? is hardly appropriate, for such secretiveness is essential tothe worshiper?s security. It is required that the worshiper, although inpossession of a heart that is lit up with knowledge, appear outwardlyignorant like a benumbed Bharat-like one who is insane, blind, deaf anddumb. Although he sees, he  should show as if he knows nothing;although he hears, it should appear that he has heard nothing. Thecanon of worship is that it should be private and secret. Only then canhe win in the gamble of nature. Lord Krishn is the victory of winners andthe resolution of men of enterprise. This was also said in the forty-firstverse of Chapter 2. The determination required for yog, its wisdom, anddirection are all one and the same. Lord Krishn is the dynamic mind,and also the magnificence and enlightenment of virtuous men.
Åetleb  ÚueÙeleeceefmce  lespemlespeefmJeveecenced~
peÙeesÓefmce JÙeJemeeÙeesÓefmce meòJeb meòJeJeleecenced~~36
dyötaØ chalayatÂmasmi tejastejasvinÂmaham |
jayo'smi vyavasÂyo'smi sattvaØ sattvavatÂmaham ||36

Chapter 10 289
37. ?I am Vasudev among the descendants of Vrishni, Dhananjay
among the Pandav, Vedvyas among sages, and Shukracharya
among poets.??
Lord Krishn is Vasudev, or the one who is everywhere, among
the Vrishni race. He is Dhananjay among the Pandav. Pandu (father of
the Pandav) is a symbol of piety; he is the one in whom virtue isawakened. Realization of the Self is the only real and lasting wealth.Lord Krishn is Dhananjay-the one who earns and stores the treasure ofSelf-knowledge. He is Vyas among sages. He is the sage who has theability to express the idea of perfection. Among poets he is Ushna(Shukr) who has in the Ved the epithet kavya attributed to him, and whoalso has the wisdom to lead the Soul to God.
38. ?And I am the oppression of tyrants, the wise conduct of
those who aspire to succeed, silence among secrets, and
also the knowledge of enlightened men.?
In fact, subjugation of the senses only happens and victory over
mind is achieved. The observation of a code of contemplation in peaceful
seclusion is a gift of Lord Krishn himself. Lord Krishn is all these.
39. ?And, O Arjun, I am also the seed from which all beings have
sprung up, because there is nothing animate or inanimate
which is without my maya.?
There is nothing, no being, in the whole world devoid of Lord Krishn
because he pervades all. All beings resemble him and are close to him.
He further adds:
Je=<Ceerveeb JeemegosJeesÓefmce heeC[Jeeveeb OeveÀeÙe:~
cegveerveecehÙenb JÙeeme: keâJeerveecegMevee keâefJe:~~37~~
oC[es oceÙeleeceefmce veereflejefmce efpeieer<eleeced~ceewveb ÛewJeeefmce ieg¢eeveeb %eeveb %eeveJeleecenced~~38~~
ÙeÛÛeeefhe meJe&Yetleeveeb yeerpeb leoncepeg&ve~
ve leoefmle efJevee ÙelmÙeevceÙee Yetleb ÛejeÛejced~~39~~
vçîàÍnÂØ vÂsudevo'smi pÂàÅavÂnÂØ dhanaájayaÉ |
munÍnÂmapyahaØ vyÂsaÉ kavÍnÂmuïanÂ kaviÉ ||37||
daàÅo damayatÂmasmi nÍtirasmi jigÍîatÂm |maunaØ caivÂsmi guhyÂnÂØ jáÂnaØ jáÂnavatÂmaham||38
yaccÂpi sarvabhötÂnÂØ bÍjaØ tadahamarjuna |
na tadasti vinÂ yatsyÂnmayÂ bhötaØ carÂcaram ||39||

Yatharth Geeta 290
40. ?What I have told you, O Parantap, is only a brief abstract of
my countless glories.??
So Arjun should regard whatever is endowed with magnificence,
radiance, and might as having come forth from Lord Krishn. This is
what he is told now. Only a few of the attributes have been clarifiedhere because Arjun wants to see all these in the very next chapter.Divine attributes can only be understood by direct perception.
41. ?Know that whatever is possessed of glory, beauty, and
strength has arisen from my own splendour.??Lord Krishn concludes his revelation of the omnipresent thus:
42. ?Or, instead of knowing anything more, O Arjun, just
remember that I am here and I bear the whole world with just
a fraction of my power.??
Lord Krishn?s enumeration of his manifold glories by analogy does
not imply that either Arjun or anyone of us should begin to adore the
beings and objects he has cited for illustration. The exercise is ratheraimed at enlightening men who are inclined to the worship of other godsand goddesses as well as of objects and creatures such as trees, rivers,planets, and serpents, that they have acquitted themselves well of theirduties to all these divinities, objects, and beings by just adoring LordKrishn alone.
???????????????
At the beginning of the chapter Lord Krishn told Arjun that he
would instruct him again in what he had also told him before becausehe was most dear to him. He was going to repeat the instruction, for a
veevleesÓefmle cece efoJÙeeveeb efJeYetleerveeb hejvlehe~
S<e letösMele: Øeesòeâes efJeYetlesefJe&mlejes ceÙee~~40~~
ÙeÅeefÉYeteflecelmeòJeb  ßeerceotefpe&lecesJe  Jee~leòeosJeeJeieÛÚ lJeb cece lespeeWÓMemecYeJeced~~41
DeLeJee  yengvewlesve  efkebâ  %eelesve  leJeepeg&ve~
efJe°YÙeenefceob ke=âlmveceskeâebMesve efmLelees peieled~~42nÂnto'sti mama divyÂnÂØ vibhötÍnÂØ parantapa |
eîa töddeïataÉ prokto vibhötervistaro mayÂ ||40||
yadyadvibhötimatsattvaØ ïrÍmadurjitameva vÂ |tattadevÂvagaccha tvaØ mama tejo-'Øïasanbhavam||41
athavÂ bahunaitena kiØ jáÂtena tavÂrjuna |
viîòabhyÂhamidaØ kçtsnamekÂØïena sthito jagat ||42||

Chapter 10 291
noble teacher?s constant guidance is a necessity till the very moment
of attainment. His origin, Lord Krishn has said, is known to neither godsnor saints, because he is the primal source from which all of them areborn. They do not know him because the universal state arising fromattainment of the unmanifest God can be experienced only by thosewho have arrived at the supreme goal. He is a man of knowledge whoknows Lord Krishn, the birthless, eternal, and supreme God of the world,by direct perception.
All the qualities that constitute the treasure of divinity such as
discernment, knowledge, freedom from delusion, restraint of the mindand senses, contentment, spiritual austerities, charity, and glory-areLord Krishn?s creations. The seven immortal sages or rather  the sevensteps of yog and, preceding them, even the four inner faculties and inaccordance with them the mind which is  self-existent, self-creator: allthese attributes of dedication and devotion to Lord Krishn, and of whichthe whole world  is progeny-are his creations. In other words, all worshipfulinclinations are shaped by him. They are generated by the grace of theaccomplished teacher rather than by themselves. The man who has adirect perception of Lord Krishn?s glories is doubtlessly worthy of merginginto him with a sense of total identity.
They who know that Lord Krishn is the root of all creation
contemplate him  with single-mindedness are dedicated to him withmind, intellect, and Soul,  exchange thoughts of his excellence amongthemselves, and rejoice in him. He bestows upon the devotees, whoeverthink of him and adore him, that discipline of yog by learning which theyat last attain to him. He does so by dwelling in their innermost beingand dispelling the darkness of spiritual ignorance by the light of knowledge.
Arjun believes in the truth that Lord Krishn is immaculate, eternal,
radiant, without a beginning, and pervading every atom of the universe.This was witnessed to by great sages of earlier times and, even atArjun?s time, divine sages like Narad, Deval, Vyas, and Lord Krishnhimself say the same. It is also true that the essence of Lord Krishn isknown to neither gods nor demons. Only that devotee knows him to

Yatharth Geeta 292
whom he chooses to make himself known. He alone is capable of
instructing the worshiper in his manifold glories by which he pervadesand dwells in them. So Arjun requests him to enlighten him at length onthe signs of his greatness. This is correct because the worshiper?simpatient curiosity to listen to his adored God should remain until thevery moment of fulfillment. Beyond this he cannot go because he knowsnot what lies within the heart of God.
Thereupon Lord Krishn has summarized to Arjun the specific
manifestations of his greatness one by one. Whereas some of themillustrate the inner qualities that are developed by initiation into yog,others illumine the glories that are earned by social achievements andaccomplishments. At the end, after all this, Lord Krishn tells Arjun thatinstead of knowing about him in detail, he should just remember thatwhatever in the three worlds is endowed with magnificence and beautyhas arisen from his own radiant power.
In this chapter Lord Krishn has thus acquainted Arjun with his
manifold glories at an intellectual level so that his faith withdraws itselffrom all distractions and is firmly centered on his destination. But evenafter listening to everything and comprehending them with much splittingof hair the essence of Lord Krishn yet remains to be known, for the pathleading to him is dynamic and can be trodden only by really embarkingon action.
Thus concludes the Tenth Chapter, in the Upanishad of the
Shreemadbhagwadgeeta, on the Knowledge of the Supreme
Spirit, the Discipline of Yog, and the Dialogue between
Lord Krishn and Arjun, entitled.
?Vibhooti Varnan? or ??An Account of God?s Glory??.
Thus concludes the Most Revered Paramhans Paramanand Ji?s
disciple Swami Adgadanand?s exposition of the Tenth Chapter of
the Shreemadbhagwadgeeta in ??Yatharth Geeta??, entitled:
?Vibhooti Varnan?.
HARI OM TAT SAT

Chapter 11 293
CHAPTER 11
REVELATION OF
THE OMNIPRESENT
In the last chapter Lord Krishn gave only a brief account of his
outstanding glories, but Arjun thought complacently that he had known
enough. He, therefore, averred that after listening to Lord Krishn?s wordshe was rid of all his delusions. At the same time, however, as he admitsin the present chapter, he is curious to know what Lord Krishn has toldhim before in a more tangible form. Hearing is as different from seeingas the east is from the west. When a seeker endeavours towards hisdestination to see it with his own eyes, what he knows then may bequite different from that which he had visualized. So when Arjun has adirect vision of God, he begins to tremble with fear and beg for mercy.Does an enlightened man know fear? Is he left with any further curiosity?The fact of the matter is that what is known at just the intellectual levelis at best vague and undefined. At the same time, however, it definitelyprompts to a desire for true knowledge. So Arjun entreats Lord Krishn.
1. ?Arjun said, ?The compassionate words with which you have
instructed me in the secret and most exalted knowledge have
dispelled my ignorance.??
What Lord Krishn has told him of the relation between the Supreme
Spirit and the individual Soul has allayed his delusions and filled him
with the light of knowledge.
Depeg&ve GJeeÛe-
ceoveg«eneÙe hejceb ieg¢eceOÙeelcemeef_%eleced~
ÙeòJeÙeesòebâ JeÛemlesve ceesnesÓÙeb efJeielees cece~~1~~arjuna uvÂca-
madanugrahÂya paramaØ guhyamadhyÂtmasaØjáitam |
yattvayoktaØ vacastena moho'yaØ vigato mama ||1||

Yatharth Geeta 294
YeJeehÙeÙeew efn Yetleeveeb ßegleew efJemlejMees ceÙee~
lJeòe: keâceuehe$ee#e ceenelcÙeceefhe ÛeeJÙeÙeced~~2~~
SJecesleÅeLeelLe lJeceelceeveb hejcesÕej~õ°gefceÛÚeefce les ¤hecewÕejb heg®<eesòece~~3~~
cevÙemes Ùeefo leÛÚkeäÙeb ceÙee õ°gefceefle ØeYees~
ÙeesiesÕej lelees ces lJeb oMe&ÙeelceeveceJÙeÙeced~~4~~ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
heMÙe ces heeLe& ¤heeefCe MeleMeesÓLe men?eMe:~
veeveeefJeOeeefve efoJÙeeefve veeveeJeCee&ke=âleerefve Ûe~~5~~heMÙeeefolÙeevJemetv®õeveefÕeveew ce®lemleLee~
yentvÙeÂ°hetJee&efCe heMÙee§eÙee&efCe Yeejle~~6~~2. ??For I have learnt from you, O the lotus-eyed, not only a
detailed account of the origin and dissolution of beings, but
also of your imperishable glory.??
He fully believes the truth of what Lord Krishn has told him, and
yet-3. ?You are, O Lord, what you have told me, but I wish, O
Supreme Being, to have a direct vision of your form in all its
divine magnificence.?
Not satisfied with what he has learnt only by hearing, he wishes
to see it in a palpable form.4. ?Show me, O Lord, your eternal form if you consider, O
Yogeshwar, that it is possible to see it.??Lord Krishn does not object to this request because Arjun is his
devoted pupil and beloved friend. So he readily grants his prayer and
reveals his cosmic form.
5. ?The Lord said, ?Behold, O Parth, my hundreds and thousands
of various celestial manifestations of different hues and
forms.??
6. ?See in me, O Bharat, the sons of Aditi, the Rudr, the Vasu,
the Ashwin brothers, and the Marut, as well as numerousother marvelous forms that have not been seen before.?
bhavÂpyayau hi bhötÂnÂØ ïrutau vistaraïo mayÂ |
tvattaÉ kamalapatrÂkîa mÂhÂtmyamapi cÂvyayam ||2
evametadyathÂttha tvamÂtmÂnaØ parameïvara |draîòumicchÂmi te röpamaiïvaraØ puruîottama ||3||
manyase yadi tacchakyaØ mayÂ draîòumiti prabho |
yogeïvara tato me tvaØ darïayÂtmÂnamavyayam ||4ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-
païya me pÂrtha röpÂài ïataïo'tha sahasraïaÉ |
nÂnÂvidhÂni divyÂni nÂnÂvaràÂkçtÍni ca ||5||païyÂdityÂnvasönrudrÂnaïvinau marutastathÂ |
bahönyadçîòapörvÂài païyÂïcaryÂài bhÂrata ||6||

Chapter 11 295
FnwkeâmLeb peielke=âlmveb heMÙeeÅe meÛejeÛejced~
cece osns ieg[ekesâMe ÙeÛÛeevÙeoddõ°gefceÛÚefme~~7~~ve leg ceeb MekeäÙemes õ°gcevesvewJe mJeÛe#eg<ee~
efoJÙeb ooeefce les Ûe#eg: heMÙe ces ÙeesiecewÕejced~~8
meÀeÙe GJeeÛe-SJecegkeälJee lelees jepevceneÙeesiesÕejes nefj:~
oMe&Ùeeceeme  heeLee&Ùe  hejceb  ¤hecewÕejced~~9~~7. ?Now, O Gudakesh, see in my body at this one place the whole
animate and inanimate world, and whatever else you desire
to know.?
Thus the Lord continues to manifest his form through three
consecutive verses, but the poor Arjun cannot see anything. He can
only rub his eyes in bewilderment. Lord Krishn notices Arjun?spredicament, stops abruptly, and says:
8. ?But since you cannot see me with your physical eyes, I grant
you divine vision with which you may behold my
magnificence and the might of my yog.??
Arjun is blessed with spiritual vision by Lord Krishn?s grace. And,
in an exactly similar fashion, Sanjay, the charioteer of Dhritrashtr, is
also blessed with divine sight by Yogeshwar Vyas? compassion
1.
Therefore, what is visible to Arjun is also seen in precisely the sameform by Sanjay, and by virtue of sharing the vision he also shares thegood that accrues from it. It is now evident that Lord Krishn is a yogi.
9. ?Sanjay said (to Dhritrashtr), ?After speaking thus, O King,
the Lord-the great master of yog-revealed his supreme,
omnipresent form to Arjun.?
The master of yog, a yogi himself and capable of bestowing yog
upon others, is named Yogeshwar. He is, similarly, God (Hari) who
seizes and carries away everything. If he only does away with grief andspares joy, grief will make a comeback. So ?Hari? is one who destroys
1. Cf. Chapter I, in which Sanjay, the epitome of self-control, is represented as the
medium through which the blind Dhritrashtr sees and hears. The mind enveloped
by the pall of ignorance perceives through one who has mastered the mind and
the senses.ihaikasthaØ jagatkçtsnaØ païyÂdya sacarÂcaram |
mama dehe guÅÂkeïa yaccÂnyaddraîòumicchasi ||7||na tu mÂØ ïakyase draîòumanenaiva svacakîuîÂ |
divyaØ dadÂmi te cakîuÉ païya me yogamaiïvaram||8
saájaya uvÂca-evamuktvÂ tato rÂjanmahÂyogeïvaro hariÉ |
darïayÂmÂsa pÂrthÂya paramaØ röpamaiïvaram ||9||

Yatharth Geeta 296
DeveskeâJekeä$eveÙeveceveskeâeÆgleoMe&veced    ~
DeveskeâefoJÙeeYejCeb efoJÙeeveskeâesÅeleeÙegOeced~~10~~
efoJÙeceeuÙeecyejOejb efoJÙeievOeeveguesheveced~meJee&§eÙe&ceÙeb osJecevevleb efJeÕeleescegKeced~~11~~
efoefJe    metÙe&men?emÙe    YeJesÅegieheogeflLelee~
Ùeefo Yee: meÂMeer mee mÙeeÆememlemÙe cenelcev e:~~12
le$ewkeâmLeb peielke=âlmveb ØeefJeYeòeâceveskeâOee~
DeheMÙeösJeosJemÙe Mejerjs heeC[Jemleoe~~13~~
lele: me efJemceÙeeefJe°es ù°jescee OeveÀeÙe:~ØeCecÙe efMejmee osJeb ke=âleeÀeefuejYee<ele~~14~~sins and has the power of conferring his own form on others. So he,
who has been all the time before Arjun, now reveals his all-pervading,radiant being.
10-11. ?And (Arjun beheld before himself) the infinite, all-pervading
God with numerous mouths and eyes, many wondrous
manifestations, decked with various ornaments, carryingmany weapons in his hands, wearing celestial garlands andapparel, anointed with heavenly perfumes, and endowed withall kinds of wonder.??
The marvelous sight is also rendered perceptible to Dhritrashtr,
the blind king, the very image of ignorance, by Sanjay-the embodiment
of restraint.
12. ?Even the light of a thousand suns in the sky could hardly
match the radiance of the omnipresent God.?
13. ?Pandu?s son (Arjun) then saw in the body of Lord Krishn,
the God of gods, the many separate worlds together.Arjun?s vision of all the worlds within Lord Krishn is a sign of his
affectionate devotion which arises from virtue.14. ??Then overwhelmed by awe and with his hair standing on
end, Arjun paid obeisance to the great God and spoke thus
with folded hands.??
anekavaktranayanamanekÂdbhutadarïanam |
anekadivyÂbharaàaØ divyÂnekodyatÂyudham ||10||
divyamÂlyÂmbaradharaØ divyagandhÂnulepanam |sarvÂïcaryamayaØ devamanantaØ viïvatomukham11
divi söryasahasrasya bhavedyugapadutthitÂ |
yadi bhÂÉ sadçïÍ sÂ syÂdbhÂsastasya mahÂtmanaÉ ||12tatraikasthaØ jagatkçtsnaØ pravibhaktamanekadhÂ |
apaïyaddevadevasya ïarÍre pÂàÅavastadÂ ||13||
tataÉ sa vismayÂviïto hçîòaromÂ dhanaájayaÉ |praàamya ïirasÂ devaØ kçtÂájalirabhÂîata ||14||

Chapter 11 297
Depeg&ve GJeeÛe-
heMÙeeefce osJeebmleJe osJe osns
meJeeËmleLee  YetleefJeMes<eme?eved~yeÇÿeeCeceerMeb keâceueemevemLe-
ce=<eeR§e meJee&vegjieeb§e efoJÙeeved~~15~~
DeveskeâyeentojJekeä$eves$ebheMÙeeefce lJeeb meJe&leesÓvevle¤heced~
veevleb ve ceOÙeb ve hegvemleJeeefob
heMÙeeefce  efJeÕesÕej  efJeÕe¤he~~16~~efkeâjeref?veb  ieefoveb  Ûeef?eâCeb  Ûe
lespeesjeefMeb meJe&lees oerefhlecevleced~
heMÙeeefce lJeeb ogefve&jer#Ùeb mecevlee-öerhleeveueeke&âÅegefleceØecesÙeced  ~~17~~Arjun had also paid homage to Lord Krishn earlier, but now after
having seen his divine majesty he bows deeper. The reverence he now
feels for Lord Krishn is a much profounder feeling than what he hadexperienced before.
15. ?Arjun said, ?I see in you, O Lord, all the gods, hosts of beings.
Brahma on his lotus-seat, Mahadev, all the great sages, and
miraculous serpents.???
 This is direct perception rather than a flight of fancy, and such a
clear vision is possible only when a Yogeshwar grants eyes that can
see it. A concrete apprehension of reality such as this is accessibleonly with the proper means.
16. ?O Lord of all the worlds, I behold your many arms, stomachs,
mouths, and eyes as well as your infinite forms of all kinds,
but, O the Omnipresent, I can see neither your end, yourmiddle, nor your beginning.??
17. ?I see you crowned and armed with a mace and a chakr,
luminous all over, like blazing fire and the sun, dazzling,and immeasurable.??
arjuna uvÂca-
païyÂmi devÂØanstava deva dehe
sarvÂnstatha bhötaviïeîasaßghÂn |brahmÂàamÍïaØ kamalÂsanastha-
mçîÍØïca sarvÂnuragÂØïca divyÂn ||15||
anekabÂhödaravaktranetraØpaïyÂmi tvÂØ sarvato'nantaröpam |
nÂntaØ na madhyaØ na punastavÂdiØ
païyÂmi viïveïvara viïvaröpa ||16||kirÍtinaØ gadinaØ cakriàaØ ca
tejorÂïiØ sarvato dÍptimantam |
païyÂmi tvÂØ durnirÍkîyaØ samantÂ-ddÍptÂnalÂrkadyutimaprameyam ||17||

Yatharth Geeta 298
lJece#ejb   hejceb   JesefoleJÙeb
lJecemÙe efJeÕemÙe hejb efveOeeveced~
lJeceJÙeÙe: MeeÕeleOece&ieeshlee
meveelevemlJeb heg®<ees celees ces~~18~~DeveeefoceOÙeevlecevevleJeerÙe&-
cevevleyeengb MeefMemetÙe&ves$eced~
heMÙeeefce lJeeb oerhlengleeMeJekeä$ebmJelespemee efJeÕeefceob lehevleced~~19~~We have here an all-embracing enumeration of the glories of Lord
Krishn. Such is his celestial brightness that eyes are blinded if they try
to see him. He is beyond comprehension by the mind. However, Arjuncan perceive him because he has completely surrendered all his sensesto him. And he is so awed by what he sees that he resorts to flatteringpanegyrics, by praising some of Lord Krishn?s many qualities.
18. ??I believe that you are Akshar, the imperishable God who is
worthy of being known, the supreme goal of the Self, the
great haven of the world, keeper of eternal Dharm, and theuniversal Supreme Spirit.??
These are also the qualities of the Self. He too, is universal,
eternal, unmanifest and imperishable. The sage attains to the same
state after his worship is brought to successful completion. That is whythe individual Soul and the Supreme Spirit are said to be identical.
19. ?I see you without beginning, end or middle, possessed of
boundless might, innumerable hands, eyes like the sun and
the moon, and a face as bright as fire, lighting up the worldwith your radiance.??
At first Lord Krishn reveals his numerous forms, but now he
appears as one and infinite. However, what are we to make of Arjun?s
statement that while one eye of God is like the sun, the other is like themoon? What is required is that these words should not be taken literally.It is not that one eye of God is bright like the sun while the other is dimlike the moon. The meaning of the statement is rather that both brightness
tvamakîaraØ paramaØ veditavyaØ
tvamasya viïvasya paraØ nidhÂnam |
tvamavyayaÉ ïÂïvatadharmagoptÂ
sanÂtanastvaØ puruîo mato me ||18||anÂdimadhyÂntamanantavÍrya-
manantabÂhuØ ïaïisöryanetram |
païyÂmi tvÂØ dÍptahutÂïavaktraØsvatejasÂ viïvamidaØ tapantam ||19||

Chapter 11 299
ÅeeJeehe=efLeJÙeesefjocevlejb efn
JÙeehleb lJeÙewkesâve efoMe§e meJee&:~Â°dJeeÆgleb  ¤heceg«eb leJesob
ueeskeâ$eÙeb ØeJÙeefLeleb cenelceved~~20~~
Deceer  efn lJeeb  megjme?e efJeMeefvlekesâefÛeÆerlee:  ØeeÀeueÙees  ie=Ceefvle~
mJemleerlÙegkeälJee cenef<e&efmeæme?e:
mlegJeefvle lJeeb mlegefleefYe: heg<keâueeefYe:~~21~~®õeefolÙee JemeJees Ùes Ûe meeOÙee
efJeÕesÓefÕeveew  ce®le§ees<cehee§e~
ievOeJe&Ùe#eemegjefmeæme?eJeer#evles lJeeb efJeefmcelee§ewJe meJex~~22~~such as that of the sun and serenity such as that of the moon emanate
from him: both the radiance of knowledge and the calm of tranquility.The sun and the moon are  symbols  here. God shines upon the worldlike both the sun and the moon, and he is now seen by Arjun as infusingthe entire world with his dazzling radiance.
20. ?And, O Supreme Being, the whole space between heaven
and earth is filled up by you and the three worlds are trembling
with fear at the sight of your divine but terrible form.?
21. ?Multitudes of gods are dissolving in you while a host of
them are fearfully extolling your name and glories with foldedhands, and, repeatedly pronouncing benediction, hosts ofgreat sages and men of attainment are singing sublime hymnsin your praise.??
22. ?The Rudr, sons of Aditi, Vasu, Sadhya, sons of Vishwa, the
Ashwin, Marut, Agni and hordes of gandharv, yaksh, demonsand men of achievement, are all looking up at you withmarvel.?
Agni, gods and multitudes of gandharv, yaksh and demons are
looking with wonder at the omnipresent form of Lord Krishn. They are
amazed because they are unable to comprehend him. They do not in
dyÂvÂpçthivyoridamantaraØ hi
vyÂptaØ tvayaikena diïaïca sarvÂÉ |dçîòvÂdbhutaØ röpamugraØ tavedaØ
lokatrayaØ pravyathitaØ mahÂtman ||20||
amÍ hi tvÂØ surasaßghÂ viïantikecidbhÍtÂÉ prÂájalayo gçàanti |
svastÍtyuktvÂ maharîisiddhasaßghÂh
stuvanti tvÂØ stutibhiÉ puîkalÂbhiÉ ||21||rudrÂdityÂ vasavo ye ca sÂdhyÂ
viïve'ïvinau marutaïcoîmapÂïca |
gandharvayakîÂsurasiddhasaßghÂvÍkîante tvÂØ vismitÂïcaiva sarve ||22||

Yatharth Geeta 300
¤heb cenòes yengJekeä$eves$eb
ceneyeenes    yengyeent®heeoced~yentojb   yengob°^ekeâjeueb
Â°dJee ueeskeâe: ØeJÙeefLeleemleLeenced~~23~~
veYe:mhe=Meb   oerhleceveskeâJeCeËJÙeeòeeveveb oerhleefJeMeeueves$eced~
Â°dJee efn lJeeb ØeJÙeefLeleevlejelcee
Oe==efleb ve efJevoeefce Meceb Ûe efJe<Cees~~24~~fact have the vision with which they can view his essence. Lord Krishn
has said earlier that men with demoniacal nature and the vulgar regardand address him as a petty mortal, whereas, although possessed of ahuman body, he really dwells in the supreme God. That is why gods,Agni and hosts of gandharv, yaksh and demons are all looking up athim with amazement. They are unable to see and grasp the reality.
23. ?Looking at your colossus form with its many mouths and
eyes, hands, thighs and feet, stomachs and dreadful tusks,
O the mighty-armed, all beings are struck with terror and soam I.?
Both Lord Krishn and Arjun are possessed of mighty arms. The
one whose sphere of action extends beyond nature is ?mighty-armed.?
Whereas Lord Krishn has achieved perfection in the field and arrived atits furthest extent, Arjun has been just initiated and is yet on his way.His destination is yet far away. Now when he looks at the universalform of Lord Krishn, like others he is also awed by the incomprehensiblegreatness of God.
24. ?When I look at your enormous, dazzling form that reaches
right up to the sky, with its  numerous  manifestations, wide
open mouth, and huge glowing eyes, O Vishnu, my inmostsoul trembles in fear, I am bereft of courage and peace ofmind.??
röpaØ mahatte bahuvaktranetraØ
mahÂbÂho bahubÂhörupÂdam |bahödaraØ bahudaØîòrÂkarÂlaØ
dçîòvÂ lokÂÉ pravyathitÂstathÂham ||23||
nabhaÉspçïaØ dÍptamanekavaràaØvyÂttÂnanaØ dÍptaviïÂlanetram |
dçîòvÂ hi tvÂØ pravyathitÂntarÂtmÂ
dhçtiØ na vindÂmi ïamaØ ca viîào ||24||

Chapter 11 301
ob°^ekeâjeueeefve  Ûe les cegKeeefve
Â°dJewJe keâeueeveuemeefVeYeeefve~
efoMees ve peeves ve ueYes Ûe Mece&Øemeero  osJesMe  peieefVeJeeme~~25~~
Deceer Ûe lJeeb Oe=leje°^mÙe heg$ee:
meJex   menwJeeJeefveheeueme?w:~Yeer<cees õesCe: metleheg$emleLeemeew
menemceoerÙewjefhe ÙeesOecegKÙew:~~26~~
Jekeä$eeefCe les lJejceeCee efJeMeefvleob°^ekeâjeueeefve YeÙeevekeâeefve~
kesâefÛeefÉueivee      oMeveevlejs<eg
mevÂMÙevles ÛetefCe&lew®òeceeÁw:~~27~~ÙeLee veoerveeb yenJeesÓcyegJesiee:
mecegõcesJeeefYecegKee    õJeefvle~
leLee  leJeeceer  vejueeskeâJeerjeefJeMeefvle Jekeä$eeCÙeefYeefJepJeueefvle~~28~~25. ?Since I have lost my sense of direction and joy by beholding
your faces with their frightening tusks and flaming like the
great conflagration that is believed to consume the world inthe event of doom, I entreat you, O God of gods, to be mercifuland pacified.?
26. ?And I see Dhritrashtr?s sons along with many other kings,
Bheeshm, Dronacharya, Karn, even the commanders of ourside and all...?
27. ?Beings rushing wildly into your dreadful mouth with its
terrible tusks, and some of them lying between your teethwith crushed heads.??
28. ?Warriors of the human world are flinging themselves into
your flaming mouths just as numerous rivers plunge intothe ocean.?
Currents of rivers are furious themselves and yet they rush into
the ocean. Even so multitudes of warriors are rushing into the fiery
daØîòrÂkarÂlÂni ca te mukhÂni
dçîòvaiva kÂlÂnalasannibhÂni |
diïo na jÂne na labhe ca ïarmaprasÍda deveïa jagannivÂsa ||25||
amÍ ca tvÂØ dhçtarÂîòrasya putrÂh
sarve sahaivÂvanipÂlasaßghaiÉ |bhÍîmo droàaÉ sötaputrastathÂsau
sahÂsmadÍyairapi yodhamukhyaiÉ ||26||
vaktrÂài te tvaramÂàÂ viïantidaØîòrÂkarÂlÂni bhayÂnakÂni |
kecidvilagnÂ daïanÂntareîu
sadçïyante cöràitairuttamÂßgaiÉ ||27||yathÂ nadÍnÂØ bahavo'mbuvegÂÉ
samudramevÂbhimukhÂ dravanti |
tathÂ tavÂmÍ naralokavÍrÂviïanti vaktrÂàyabhivijvalanti ||28||

Yatharth Geeta 302
ÙeLee  Øeoerhleb  pJeueveb  heleÁe
efJeMeefvle veeMeeÙe mece=æJesiee:~
leLewJe veeMeeÙe efJeMeefvle ueeskeâe-
mleJeeefhe Jekeä$eeefCe mece=æJesiee:~~29~~uesefue¢emes «emeceeve: mecevlee-
uueeskeâevmece«eevJeovewpJe&ueefÆ:~
lespeesefYejehetÙe&   peielmece«ebYeememleJees«ee: Øeleheefvle efJe<Cees~~30~~
DeeKÙeeefn ces keâes YeJeeveg«e¤hees
veceesÓmleg  les  osJeJej  Øemeero~efJe%eelegefceÛÚeefce  YeJevleceeÅeb
ve efn Øepeeveeefce leJe ØeJe=efòeced~~31~~mouths of God. They are men of courage and valour, but God is like the
ocean. Human strength is nothing against his might. The following verseillustrates why and how they hurl themselves into him.
29. ?They cast themselves into your mouths for their destruction
just as flying insects fling themselves into the flame.?
30. ?Devouring all the worlds with your flaming mouths and
licking your lips, your intense lustre is consuming the whole
world by filling it with its radiance.?
This is clearly a portrayal of the dissolution of unrighteous
properties in God after which even the utility of the treasure of divinity
is dispensed with. Righteous properties, too, then merge into the sameSelf. Arjun sees the Kaurav warriors and then the warriors of his ownarmy vanishing into Lord Krishn?s mouth. So he pleads with him.
31. ?Since I am ignorant of your nature, O Primal Being, and
wish to know its reality, I pay my humble obeisance and pray
you, O supreme God, to tell me who you are in this terribleform.??
Arjun wishes to know who Lord Krishn is in his immense form and
what he intends to do. He does not yet fully understand the ways in
which God fulfils himself. Thereupon Lord Krishn speaks to him.
yathÂ pradÍptaØ jvalanaØ pataßgÂ
viïanti nÂïÂya samçddhavegÂÉ |
tathaiva nÂïÂya viïanti lokÂ-
stavÂpi vaktrÂài samçddhavegÂÉ ||29||lelihyase grasamÂnaÉ samantÂ-
llokÂnsamagrÂnvadanairjvaladbhiÉ |
tejobhirÂpÂrya jagatsamagraØbhÂsastavogrÂÉ pratapanti viîào ||30||
ÂkhyÂhi me ko bhavÂnugraröpo
namo'stu te devavara prasÍda |vijáÂtumicchÂmi bhavantamÂdyaØ
na hi prajÂnÂmi tava pravçttim ||31||

Chapter 11 303
ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
keâeueesÓefmce ueeskeâ#eÙeke=âlØeJe=æes
ueeskeâevmeceenleg&efcen   ØeJe=òe:~$e+lesÓefhe lJeeb ve YeefJe<Ùeefvle meJex
ÙesÓJeefmLelee: ØelÙeveerkesâ<eg ÙeesOee:~~32~~
lemceeòJecegefòe? ÙeMees ueYemJeefpelJee Me$etvYeg*dd#Je jepÙeb mece=æced~
ceÙewJewles    efvenlee:   hetJe&cesJe
efveefceòecee$eb  YeJe  meJÙemeeefÛeved~~33~~32. ?The Lord said, ?l am the almighty time (kal), now inclined to
and engaged in the destruction of worlds, and warriors of
the opposing armies are going to die even without your killingthem.? ?
He further adds:
33. ?So you should get up and earn renown and enjoy a thriving
and affluent kingdom by vanquishing your enemies, because
these warriors have already been killed by me and you, OSavyasachin
2 (Arjun), have to be just the nominal agent of
their destruction.?
Lord Krishn has said repeatedly that God neither acts himself nor
causes others to act, and does not even devise coincidences. It is only
because of their deluded minds that people believe that every action iseffected by God. But here we have Lord Krishn himself getting up andsaying that he has already annihilated his foes. Arjun has to do nothingmore save merely taking the credit for this by making just a gesture ofkilling them. This again takes us back to his essential nature. He is theimage of affectionate devotion, and God is ever inclined to help andsupport such loving worshipers. He is a doer for them-their charioteer.
This is the third occasion when the idea of ?kingdom? occurs in
the Geeta. Initially Arjun did not want to fight and he told Lord Krishnthat he could not see how his becoming an uncontested ruler of a thrivingand wealthy kingdom on the earth or even an Indr-like lord of gods
2. Arjun is so called because he could also shoot arrows with his left hand.ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-
kÂlo'smi lokakîayakçtpravçddho
lokÂnsamÂhartumiha pravçttaÉ |çte'pi tvÂØ na bhaviîyanti sarve
ye'vasthitaÉ pratyanÍkeîu yodhÂÉ ||32||
tasmÂttvamuttiîòha yaïo labhasvajitvÂ ïatrönbhußkîva rÂjyaØ samçddham |
mayaivaite nihatÂÉ pörvameva
nimittamÂtraØ bhava savyasÂcin ||33||

Yatharth Geeta 304
õesCeb Ûe Yeer<ceb  Ûe peÙeõLeb Ûe
keâCeË leLeevÙeeveefhe ÙeesOeJeerjeved~ceÙee nleebmlJeb peefn cee JÙeefLe?e
ÙegOÙemJe pesleeefme jCes mehelveeved~~34~~could wipe out the grief that was wearing out his senses. He did not
want either of these if his grief was to persist even after his achievementof these rewards. Yogeshwar Krishn then told him that in case of defeatin the war he would be rewarded with heavenly existence and, in caseof victory, with attainment of the Supreme Spirit. And now he says thatthe enemies have already been slain by him and that Arjun has to actjust as a proxy to win both renown and rulership of a thriving realm.Does Lord Krishn mean by this that he is going to bestow upon Arjunthe very worldly rewards with which he is so evidently disillusioned-therewards in which he cannot see the end of his misery? Such, however,is not the case. The promised reward is the ultimate union with Godthat results from a destruction of all contradictions of the material world.This is the only permanent attainment, which is never destroyed andwhich is an outcome of raj-yog, the highest form of all yog. So LordKrishn once more exhorts Arjun to-
34. ?Destroy, without any fear, Dronacharya, Bheeshm, Jayadrath,
Karn, and the many other warriors who have already been
killed by me, and fight because you will doubtlessly vanquishyour foes.??
 Here, again, Lord Krishn exhorts Arjun to kill the enemies who
have already been destroyed by him. Doesn?t this suggest that he is
the doer, whereas he had said explicitly in verses 13-15 of Chapter 5that God is a non-doer? Apart from this he will later assert that there areonly five means by which both good and evil actions are executed:basis (the governing power under the auspices of which something isdone), the agent (mind), the instruments or means (senses as well asdisposition), efforts or exertions (desires), and providence (which isdetermined by actions in previous existence). They who say that God
droàaØ ca bhÍîmaØ ca jayadrathaØ ca
karàaØ tathÂnyÂnapi yodhavÍrÂn |mayÂ hatÂØstvaØ jahi mÂ vyathiîòhÂ
yudhyasva jetÂsi raàe sapatnÂn ||34||

Chapter 11 305
meÀeÙe GJeeÛe-
SleÛÚÎlJee  JeÛeveb kesâMeJemÙeke=âleeÀeefueJexheceeve: efkeâjer?er~
vecemke=âlJee YetÙe SJeen ke=â<Ceb
meieûob YeerleYeerle: ØeCecÙe~~35~~is the sole doer are ignorant and deceived. What, then, is the explanation
for this contradiction?
 The truth is that there is a dividing line between nature and the
Supreme Spirit. So long as the influence of the objects of nature isdominant, universal ignorance (maya) is the motivating force. But, aftera worshiper has transcended nature, he succeeds in gaining admissionto the sphere of action of the adored God or, in other words, of theenlightened Guru. Let us not forget that in the sense of ?motivator,? anaccomplished teacher the individual Soul, the Supreme Soul, the objectof worship, and God are all synonymous. The directions received bythe worshiper all come from God. After this stage, God or theaccomplished Guru -arising from the Soul of the worshiper himself-ispresent in his heart like a charioteer who guides him on the right path.
The Revered Maharaj Ji used to say, ?Mark that the act of worship
has not commenced adequately until the worshiper is aware of his Selfand God has come down to his level. Henceforth, whatever he does isa gift from God. The worshiper then goes along the way only accordingto God?s signals and directions. The worshiper?s success is a grace ofGod. It is God who sees for such worshipers through his eyes, showshim the path, and so enables him at last to become one with himself.?This is what Lord Krishn means when he tells Arjun to kill his enemies.Arjun will surely win, for God himself is standing by him.
35. ?Sanjay (further) said (to Dhritrashtr),? Trembling with fear at
hearing these words of Keshav
3 and overwhelmed by feeling,
Arjun thus spoke to Lord Krishn with folded hands and
reverent humbleness.? ?
3. A name of Lord Krishn (God).saájaya uvÂca-
etacchrutvÂ vacanaØ keïavasyakçtÂájalirvepamÂnaÉ kirÍtÍ |
namaskçtvÂ bhöya evÂha kçîàaØ
sagadgadaØ bhÍtabhÍtaÉ praàamya ||35||

Yatharth Geeta 306
Depeg&ve GJeeÛe-
mLeeves ù<eerkesâMe  leJe ØekeâerlÙee&peielØeù<ÙelÙevegjpÙeles   Ûe~
j#eebefme Yeerleeefve efoMees õJeefvle
meJex vecemÙeefvle Ûe efmeæme?e:~~36~~keâmceeÛÛe les ve vecesjvcenelceved
iejerÙemes yeÇÿeCeesÓhÙeeefokeâ$ex~
Devevle   osJesMe   peieefVeJeemelJece#ejb meomeòelhejb Ùeled~~37~~
lJeceeefoosJe:  heg®<e:  hegjeCe-
mlJecemÙe efJeÕemÙe hejb efveOeeveced~Jesòeeefme JesÅeb Ûe hejb Ûe Oeece
lJeÙee   leleb   efJeÕecevevle¤he~~38~~Sanjay has seen exactly what Arjun has seen. Dhritrashtr is blind,
but even he can see, hear, and understand clearly through restraint.
36. ?Arjun said, ?It is but right, O Hrishikesh, that men rejoice in
singing praises of your name and glory, demons flee helter-
skelter out of fear of your glory, and accomplished sagesbow to you in reverence.? ?
37. ?What else can they do, O Great Soul, besides paying homage
to you when you are, O God of gods and primal energy of theuniverse, the imperishable Supreme Spirit who is beyond allbeing and the non-being??
Arjun can speak so because he has had a direct vision of the
imperishable God. Just a view or assumption at the intellectual level
cannot lead one to realization of the indestructible Supreme Spirit. Arjun?svision of God is an inner perception.
38. ?You, O infinite, are the primal God, eternal Spirit, the
ultimate heaven of the world, seer, worthy of realization, the
supreme goal, and the all-pervading.?
arjuna uvÂca-
sthÂne hçîÍkeïa tava prakÍrtyÂjagatprahçîyatyanurajyate ca |
rakîÂØsi bhÍtÂni diïo dravanti
sarve namasyanti ca siddhasaßghÂÉ ||36||kasmÂcca te na nameranmahÂtman
garÍyase brahmaào'pyÂdikartre |
ananta deveïa jagannivÂsatvamakîaraØ sadasattatparaØ yat ||37||
tvamÂdidevaÉ puruîaÉ purÂàa-
stvamasya viïvasya paraØ nidhÂnam |vettÂsi vedyaØ ca paraØ ca dhÂma
tvayÂ tataØ viïvamanantaröpa ||38||

Chapter 11 307
JeeÙegÙe&ceesÓefiveJe&®Ce: MeMee¿:
ØepeeheeflemlJeb Øeefheleecen§e~
vecees  vecemlesÓmleg men?eke=âlJe:
hegve§e YetÙeesÓefhe vecees vecemles~~39~~vece:  hegjmleeoLe  he=?lemles
veceesÓmleg les meJe&le SJe meJe&~
DevevleJeerÙee&efceleefJe?eâcemlJebmeJeË meceehveesef<e leleesÓefme meJe&:~~40~~
meKesefle celJee ØemeYeb Ùeogòebâ
ns ke=â<Ce ns ÙeeoJe ns meKesefle~Depeevelee  ceefnceeveb  leJesob
ceÙee ØeceeoelØeCeÙesve Jeeefhe~~41~~
ÙeÛÛeeJenemeeLe&cemelke=âleesÓefmeefJenejMeÙÙeemeveYeespeves<eg~
SkeâesÓLeJeehÙeÛÙegle lelmece#eb
lel#eeceÙes lJeecenceØecesÙeced~~42~~39. ?As you are the wind, the god of death (Yamraj), fire, the rain-
god (Varun), the moon, the Lord of all creation, and even the
primal root of Brahma, I bow before you a thousand timesand even more.??
So overwhelmed is Arjun by his faith and dedication that even
after paying obeisance again and again he is not contented. So he
continues with his tributes:
40. ?Since you possess, O the imperishable and almighty, infinite
prowess and are the God who is omnipresent, you are
honoured everywhere (by all).??
Thus bowing repeatedly in obeisance, Arjun begs for forgiveness
for his errors:41-42. ?I seek your forgiveness, O the infinite, for all the indiscreet
words I might have spoken to you, for taking the undue liberty
of addressing you as ?Krishn? and ?Yadav?, for any disrespectI might have inadvertently shown you in the course of
vÂyuryamo'gnirvaruàaÉ ïaïÂßkaÉ
prajÂpatistvaØ prapitÂmahaïca |
namo namaste'stu sahasrakçtvaÉ
punaïca bhuyo'pi namo namaste ||39||namaÉ purastÂdatha pçîòhataste
namo'stu te sarvata eva sarva |
anantavÍryÂmitavikramastvaØsarvaØ samÂpnoîi tato'si sarvaÉ ||40||
sakheti matvÂ prasabhaØ yaduktaØ
he kçîàa he yÂdava he sakheti |ajÂnatÂ mahimÂnaØ tavedaØ
mayÂ pramÂdÂtpraàayena vÂpi ||41||
yaccÂvahÂsÂrthamasatkçto'sivihÂraïayyÂsanabhojaneîu |
eko'thavÂpyacyuta tatsamakîaØ
tatkîÂmaye tvÂmahamaprameyam ||42||

Yatharth Geeta 308
efheleeefme    ueeskeâmÙe    ÛejeÛejmÙe
lJecemÙe hetpÙe§e ieg®ie&jerÙeeved~ve lJelmeceesÓmlÙeYÙeefOekeâ: kegâleesÓvÙees
ueeskeâ$eÙesÓhÙeØeefleceØeYeeJe  ~~43~~
lemceelØeCecÙe ØeefCeOeeÙe keâeÙebØemeeoÙes lJeecenceerMeceer[?eced~
efhelesJe heg$emÙe  meKesJe meKÙeg:
efØeÙe: efØeÙeeÙeen&efme osJe mees{gced~~44~~frivolous dalliance or repose or while eating meals, O Achyut
(infallible), or while we were together alone or with others,out of my feeling that you are my intimate friend and becauseof carelessness arising from my ignorance of your truemagnificence.??
 Arjun has the courage to beg for Lord Krishn?s forgiveness for
his mistakes because of his conviction that he is indifferent to all of
them: that he will forgive him because he is father of mankind, thenoblest of teachers, and truly worthy of reverent worship.
43. ?Since no one in the three worlds can even equal you, who
are father of the animate and inanimate worlds, the greatest
of all teachers, most venerable, and of immensemagnificence, how can anyone else be superior to you??
44. ?So throwing myself at your feet and bowing to you in the
humblest homage, I beseech you, O the most adorable God,to forgive my errors as a father forgives his son, a friend hisfriend and a loving husband his beloved wife.?
Arjun is convinced that Lord Krishn alone is large-hearted enough
to be indulgent to his faults. But what after all is his error? By what
other name than ?Krishn? could he address his dark-skinned friend?Should we call a black man white? Is it sin to call a spade a spade?Calling Lord Krishn a ?Yadav,? too, could not be wrong, because LordKrishn had a Yadav family ancestry. Neither was it an offence to callhim a ?friend,? because Lord Krishn also regards Arjun as an intimate
pitÂsi lokasya carÂcarasya
tvamasya pöjyaïca gururgarÍyÂn |na tvatsamo'styabhyadhikaÉ kuto'nyo
lokatraye'pyapratimaprabhÂva ||43||
tasmÂtpraàamya praàidhÂya kÂyaØprasÂdaye tvÂmahamÍïamÍdyam |
piteva putrasya sakheva sakhyuÉ
priyaÉ priyÂyÂrhasi deva soÅhum ||44||

Chapter 11 309
friend. Obviously, however, Arjun is abjectly apologetic because he
believes that his addressing Lord Krishn as ?Krishn? is an offence.
The way of meditation is essentially the one that Lord Krishn has
laid down. He counselled Arjun, in the thirteenth verse of Chapter 8, torecite OM and contemplate him. OM, we remember, is a symbol of theimperishable God. Arjun was told to recite the sacred syllable andvisualize Lord Krishn?s image, for OM which stands for the unmanifestSupreme Being is also a symbol of the sage after he has attained to thesupreme goal of God-realization. When Arjun has a clear vision of LordKrishn?s true magnificence, it strikes him that he is neither white norblack, and not even a friend or a Yadav; he is but a great Soul that hasbecome one and identical with the imperishable Supreme Spirit.
In the whole of the Geeta, Lord Krishn has, on seven different
occasions, stressed the importance of reciting OM. If we have to pray,let us recite OM rather than the name of Lord Krishn. Sentimentalworshipers usually manage to invent some way or the other. While oneof them is dismayed by controversy over the propriety or otherwise ofreciting OM, another one appeals to sages, and yet another who iseager to quickly ingratiate himself with Lord Krishn also appends Radhato his name. True that they do all this out of devotion, but their prayersare marked by excessive sentiment. If we have a real feeling for LordKrishn, we must obey his instruction. Although abiding in the unmanifest,he is always present before us  even if we are unable to see him becauseof inadequate vision. His voice is with us, but we cannot hear it. Therewill be little profit in our study of the Geeta if we do not obey him,although one advantage of such a study is always there. The man wholistens to and learns the Geeta gains an awareness of knowledge andyagya, and so attains to more exalted bodies. So study is imperative.
An uninterrupted sequence of the name ?Krishn? fails to materialize
while we are meditating in a state of breath-control. Out of sheer emotionsome men recite just the name of Radha. Isn?t it a common practice toflatter the wives of unapproachable functionaries? It is hardly surprisingthen that many of us believe that we can please God in the same way.

Yatharth Geeta 310
DeÂ°hetJeË ùef<eleesÓefmce Â°dJee
YeÙesve Ûe ØeJÙeefLeleb cevees ces~
leosJe   ces  oMe&Ùe   osJe¤heb
Øemeero osJesMe peieefVeJeeme~~45~~So we even stop uttering ?Krishn? and begin to recite just ?Radha,?
hoping that she will facilitate admittance to him. But how can the poorRadha do this when she herself could not be united with Lord Krishn?So, instead of paying any heed to what others have to say, let us reciteonly OM. At the same time it must be admitted that Radha should beour ideal; we have to dedicate ourselves to God with the intensity of herdevotion to her loved one. It is essential that we be like her, piningaway in separation from Lord Krishn.
Arjun addressed his friend as ?Krishn? because that was his actual
name. Similarly quite a number of worshipers recite the name of theirteacher-preceptor out of sentiment. But as it has already been shown,after realization a sage becomes one with the unmanifest God in whomhe abides. So many disciples ask, ?When we contemplate you whyshould we not, O teacher, recite your name or that of Lord Krishn insteadof the traditional OM?? But Yogeshwar Krishn has made it quite explicithere that after attainment a sage is possessed of the same name asthat of the Supreme Spirit in whom he has merged. ?Krishn? is anappellation rather than a name for recital in yagya.
When Arjun begs for indulgence for his offences and pleads with
him to revert to his usual benign form, Lord Krishn both forgives himand accedes to his request. Arjun?s plea for mercy is made in the followingverse:
45. ?Be appeased, O the infinite and God of gods, and show me
your merciful form, because although I rejoice at beholding
your wondrous (all-pervading) form which I had not viewedbefore, my mind is also afflicted with terror.??
Till now Yogeshwar Krishn has appeared before Arjun in his
omnipresent form. Since Arjun has not seen it ever before, it is quite
adçîòapörvaØ hçîito'smi dçîòvÂ
bhayena ca pravyathitaØ mano me |
tadeva me darïaya devaröpaØ
prasÍda deveïa jagannivÂsa ||45||

Chapter 11 311
natural that he is filled at once with joy and dread. His mind is deeply
agitated. Earlier, perhaps, Arjun had prided himself on the excellenceof his skill of archery and even thought himself superior to Lord Krishnin that respect. But a sight of the Lord?s all-pervasive immensity fillshim with awe. After hearing in the last chapter of Lord Krishn?s glories,he had evidently begun to take himself as a man of knowledge andwisdom. But one who is endowed with knowledge and wisdom in thetrue sense is beyond any fear. The experience of a direct perception ofGod has in fact a unique effect. Even after a worshiper has heard andlearnt everything in theory, it remains for him to gain an awareness ofthe reality by practice and personal experience. When Arjun has such avision, he is overwhelmed at once by joy and dread, and his mind isshaken. So he entreats Lord Krishn to resume his placid, compassionateform.
46. ?Since I long to see you, O the thousand-armed omnipresent
God, as I beheld you earlier, wearing a crown and armed
with a mace and your chakr, I pray you to resume your four-armed shape.?
Let us see what this four-armed form of Lord Krishn is.
47. ?The Lord said, ?I have compassionately revealed to you, O
Arjun, by an exercise of my power of yog, my resplendent,
primeval, infinite, omnipresent form which no one else hasbeheld before.? ?
efkeâjeref?veb ieefoveb Ûe?eânmle-
efceÛÚeefce lJeeb õ°gcenb leLewJe~
lesvewJe  ¤hesCe  ÛelegYeg&pesvemen?eyeenes YeJe efJeÕecetlex~~46~~
ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
ceÙee  ØemeVesve  leJeepeg&vesob¤heb hejb oefMe&leceelceÙeesieeled~
lespeesceÙeb efJeÕecevevleceeÅeb
Ùevces lJeovÙesve ve Â°hetJe&ced~~47~~
kirÍòinaØ gadinaØ cakrahasta-
micchÂmi tvÂØ draîòumahaØ tathaiva |
tenaiva röpeàa caturbhujenasahasrabÂho bhava viïvamörte ||46||
ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-
mayÂ prasannena tavÂrjunedaØröpaØ paraØ darïitamÂtmayogÂt |
tejomayaØ viïvamanantamÂdyaØ
yanme tvadanyena na dçîòapörvam ||47||

Yatharth Geeta 312
48. ?O the most distinguished of Kuru, no one else besides you
in this mortal world is capable of seeing my infinite, universal
form, which can be known neither by study of the Ved nor by
performance of yagya, nor even by charity or virtuous deeds,or rigorous spiritual austerities.?
If the assertions made by Lord Krishn in the verse above as well
as his assurance to Arjun that no one except him is able to see his
immense, all pervading form are true, the Geeta has hardly any use for
us. In that case, then, the ability to perceive God belongs to Arjun
alone. On the other hand, however, Lord Krishn also pointed out to himbefore that many sages in earlier times, who concentrated on him with
a mind that was free from passion, fear, and wrath and who purified
themselves by the penance of knowledge, had succeeded in attainingto his form. But now he surprisingly affirms that neither has anyone
known his cosmic manifestation in the past nor will anyone know it in
the future. Who after all is this Arjun? Is he not a corporal frame like allof us? As represented in the Geeta, he is an embodiment of tenderaffection. No man devoid of this feeling could see in the past and no
man devoid of this feeling can see in the future. This quality of love
requires a worshiper to draw his mind from all externals and devote it tothe desired God alone. Only by the ordained way can one who
approaches God with love realize him. Acceding to Arjun?s entreaties,
Lord Krishn now appears in his four-armed form.
49. ?Behold again my four-armed form (bearing a lotus, a conch,
a mace, and my chakr), so that you are freed from the
ve   JesoÙe%eeOÙeÙevewve&   oevew-
ve& Ûe ef?eâÙeeefYeve& leheesefYe®«ew:~
SJeb¤he: MekeäÙe Denb ve=ueeskesâõ°gb   lJeovÙesve   kegâ®ØeJeerj~~48~~
cee les JÙeLee cee Ûe efJecet{YeeJees
Â<?dJee ¤heb IeesjceerÂ*ddcecesoced~JÙehesleYeer:  Øeerlecevee:  hegvemlJeb
leosJe  ces  ¤heefceob  ØeheMÙe~~49~~
na vedayajáÂdhyayanairna dÂnai-rna ca kriyÂbhirna tapobhirugraiÉ |
evaØröpaÉ ïakya ahaØ nçlokedraîòuØ tvadanyena kurupravÍra ||48||
mÂ te vyathÂ mÂ ca vimöÅhabhÂvo
dçîòvÂ röpaØ ghoramÍdçßmamedam |vyapetabhÍÉ prÍtamanÂÉ punastvaØ
tadeva me röpamidaØ prapaïya ||49||

Chapter 11 313
confusions and fears inspired by my terrible manifestation
and think of me with (nothing but) affection.?
50. ?Sanjay further said (to Dhritrashtr), ?After thus speaking to
Arjun, Lord Vasudev again revealed his earlier form and thesage-like Lord Krishn thus comforted the frightened Arjunby manifesting to him his placid form.? ?
51. ?Thereafter Arjun said, ?O Janardan, I have regained my
composure and tranquility of mind by seeing this your mostbenevolent human form.? ?
Arjun had pleaded with the Lord to appear in his four-armed shape.
But what does he see when Lord Krishn accedes to his request and
appears in the desired form? What else but the human form? In truth,the terms ?four-armed? and ?many-armed? are used for sages after theyhave achieved the supreme goal. The two-armed sage-teacher is verymuch with his loving pupil, but someone from elsewhere remembers,too, and the same sage then, awakened by the Spirit of that power, istransformed into the charioteer who guides the seeker on to the rightpath. ?Arm? is a symbol of action. So our arms function not only externallybut also internally. This is the four-armed form. The ?conch,? ?chakr,??mace,? and ?lotus? borne by Lord Krishn?s four arms are all symbolic,standing respectively for an affirmation of the true goal (conch),commencement of the cycle of attainment (chakr), subduing of thesense (mace), and competence in action that is unblemished and pure(lotus). That is why Arjun views the four-armed Lord Krishn as a human.Rather than meaning that there was some four-armed Lord Krishn, the
meÀeÙe GJeeÛe-
FlÙepeg&veb JeemegosJemleLeeskeälJee
mJekebâ ¤heb oMe&Ùeeceeme YetÙe:~DeeÕeemeÙeeceeme Ûe Yeerlecesveb
YetlJee hegve: meewcÙeJehegce&nelcee~~50~~
Depeg&ve GJeeÛe-Â°dJesob ceeveg<eb ¤heb leJe meewcÙeb peveeo&ve~
Foeveerceefmce mebJe=òe: meÛeslee: Øeke=âefleb iele:~~51
saájaya uvÂca-ityarjunaØ vÂsudevastathoktvÂ
svakaØ röpaØ darïayÂmÂsa bhöyaÉ |ÂïvÂsayÂmÂsa ca bhÍtamenaØ
bhötvÂ punaÉ saumyavapurmahÂtmÂ ||50||
arjuna uvÂca-dçîòvedaØ mÂnuîaØ röpaØ tava saumyaØ janÂrdana |
idÂnÍmasmi saØvçttaÉ sacetÂÉ prakçitiØ gataÉ ||51||

Yatharth Geeta 314
expression ?fourarmed? is but a metaphor for the special mode of action
that sages accomplish with their body as well as Soul.
52. ?The Lord said, ?This form of mine which you have seen is
the most rare, because even gods ever pine for a view of it.??This placid, benevolent manifestation of Lord Krishn is the most
uncommon and even gods yearn to see it. That is to say that it is not
possible for all to recognize a sage for what he is. The Most ReveredSatsangi Maharaj Ji, the accomplished teacher of my Revered teacherMaharaj Ji was one such saint with a truly awakened Soul, but most ofthe people regarded him as a mad man. Only a very few virtuous menlearnt from heavenly signs that he was a sage of noble accomplishment.And only these men then grasped him with all their heart, attained to hismetaphysical form, and reached the desired goal. This is what LordKrishn suggests when he tells Arjun that gods, who have consciouslystored their hearts with the treasure of divinity, hanker after a view ofhis ?four-armed? form. As to whether he can be known by yagya, charityor study of the Ved, Lord Krishn states :
53. ?My four-armed form which you have seen is beyond knowing
by either study of the Ved or by penance or by charity, and
not even by munificence or performance of yagya.?
The one way by which he may be perceived is disclosed in the
following verse:54. ?O Arjun, a man of great penance, a worshiper can know this
form of mine directly, acquire its essence, and even become
one with it by a total and unswerving dedication.?
ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
megogo&Me&efceob   ¤heb   Â°Jeeveefme   Ùevcece~
osJee DehÙemÙe ¤hemÙe efvelÙeb oMe&vekeâeef*dd#eCe:~~52veenb Jesowve& lehemee ve oevesve ve ÛespÙeÙee~
MekeäÙe SJebefJeOees õ°gb Â°Jeeveefme ceeb ÙeLee~~53~~
YekeälÙee lJevevÙeÙee MekeäÙe DencesJebefJeOeesÓpeg&ve~%eelegb õ°gb Ûe leòJesve ØeJes°gb Ûe hejvlehe~~54~~
ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-
sudurdarïamidaØ röpaØ dçîòavÂnasi yanmama |
devÂ apyasya röpasya nityaØ darïanakÂßkîiàaÉ ||52||nÂhaØ vedairna tapasÂ na dÂnena na cejyayÂ |
ïakya evaØvidho draîòuØ dçîòavÂnasi mÂØ yathÂ ||53||
bhaktyÂ tvananyayÂ ïakya ahamevaØvidho'rjuna |jáÂtuØ draîòuØ ca tattvena praveîòuØ ca parantapa54

Chapter 11 315
The one way to attain to Supreme Spirit is perfect intentness, the
state in which a worshiper remembers nothing besides the adored goal.
As we have seen in Chapter 7, even knowledge is finally transformedinto total devotion. Lord Krishn said a little while earlier that no onebesides Arjun had seen him before and no one would ever see him inthe future. But he now reveals that by such single-minded devotionworshipers can not only see him, but also realize him directly and becomeone with him. So Arjun is the name of such a wholly dedicated worshiper:the name of a state of mind and heart rather than of a person. All-absorbing love itself is Arjun. So Yogeshwar Krishn says at last:
55. ?This man, O Arjun, who acts only for my sake (matkarmah),
rests on and is dedicated to me alone (matparmah), in
complete detachment (sangvarjitah) and freedom from malicetowards all beings (nirvairah sarvbhooteshu), knows andattains to me.??
The four essential requirements of the evolutionary discipline by
which a man can achieve spiritual perfection or transcendence (of which
human life is the means) are indicated by the terms: ?matkarmah,??matparmah,? ?sangvarjitah,? and ?nirvairah sarvbhooteshu.? ?Matkarmah?means performance of the ordained act-the act of yagya. ?Matparmah?is the necessity of the worshiper?s taking refuge in Lord Krishn and ofcomplete devotion to him. The required action is impossible toaccomplish without total disinterestedness in worldly objects and thefruits of action (sangvarjitah). The last but not the least requirement is?nirvrairah sarvbhooteshu?: absence of malice or ill-will towards all beings.Only a worshiper fulfilling these four conditions can attain to Lord Krishn.It hardly needs saying that if the four ways urged by the last verse ofthe chapter are observed, the resulting state is one in which externalwar and physical bloodshed are simply out of the question. That is onemore instance that the Geeta is not about external fighting. There is not
celkeâce&ke=âvcelhejcees ceÆòeâ: meÁJee|pele:~
efveJezj: meJe&Yetles<eg Ùe: me ceecesefle heeC[Je~~55~~
matkarmakçnmatparamo madbhaktaÉ saßgavarjitaÉ |nirvairaÉ sarvabhöteîu yaÉ sa mÂmeti pÂàÅava ||55||

Yatharth Geeta 316
one verse in the poem that supports the idea of physical violence or
killing. When we have sacrificed ourselves through yagya, rememberonly God and no one else, are completely detached from both natureand the rewards of our action, and when there is no malignity in ustowards any being, with whom and for what shall we fight? The fourobservances lead a worshiper to the stage at which he stands entirelyalone. If there is no one with him, who shall he fight? According to LordKrishn, Arjun has known him. This would not be possible if there wereeven the slightest touch of malice about him. So it is evident that thewar waged by Arjun in the Geeta is against fearful enemies such asattachment and repulsion, infatuation and malice, and desire and anger,that rise up in the way of the worshiper when he engages in the task ofsingle-minded contemplation after having achieved an attitude ofdetachment to worldly objects as well as rewards.
???????????????
At the beginning of the chapter Arjun admitted to Lord Krishn that
his delusions were wiped out by the kind words with which he had revealedhis manifold glories to him. Yet, since Lord Krishn had said earlier thathe was all-pervading, Arjun also wished to have a direct vision of hismagnificence. He requested the Yogeshwar to show him his universal,imperishable form if it was within the power of his mortal eyes to beholdsuch a manifestation. As Arjun is his beloved friend and a most faithfuldevotee, Lord Krishn gladly acceded to his request.
After having assumed his universal form, Lord Krishn told Arjun
to behold in him celestial beings like the seven immortal sages andsages who had been in yet earlier times, and Brahma and Vishnu. Arjun?snotice was thus further drawn to the all-pervading majesty of God.Summing up his exhortations, Lord Krishn told Arjun how at one momentand at one place he could behold in him the whole animate as well asinanimate world, and also whatever else he was curious to know.
This enumeration by Lord Krishn went on through three verses,
from 5 to 7. But Arjun?s physical eyes could see none of the glories

Chapter 11 317
enumerated by the Lord. All the celestial majesty of God was before his
eyes, but they could only see Lord Krishn as a common mortal. Realizingthis difficulty of Arjun, Lord Krishn paused and blessed him with thedivine vision with which he could behold his true greatness. And thenArjun saw God himself before him. He had thus a direct and real perceptionof God. Overwhelmed by terror at what he saw, he began to entreatLord Krishn most humbly to forgive his wrongs which are not truly wrongs.He thought he had offended him by addressing him as ?Krishn,? ?Yadav,?and ?friend.? As these were no wrongs, Lord Krishn readily showed hismercy and resumed his pleasing and benevolent form in deference toArjun?s request. He also spoke words of comfort and encouragement tohim.
Arjun?s calling his friend by the name of ?Krishn? was no offence;
Lord Krishn had a dark complexion. Neither was addressing him as?Yadav? an indiscretion, because he did belong to the line ofYaduvanshis. If Arjun called Lord Krishn a ?friend,? that too was notwrong, for even Lord Krishn regards him as an intimate friend. Theseare all, in fact, instances of the initial attitude of seekers towards greatsouls for whom the term ?sage? has been used in the rendering. Someof them address these sages according to their appearance and shape.Some of them name them by their distinguishing attribute, while yetsome others consider them equals. They fail to comprehend the essenceof sages. But when Arjun at last knows the true form of Lord Krishn, herealizes that he is neither black nor white, nor does he belong to anyfamily or is anyone?s friend. When there is no one like Lord Krishn, howcan anyone be his friend? Or his peer? He is beyond rationalcomprehension. A man can know Lord Krishn only if the Yogeshwarchooses to reveal himself to him. That is the reason behind Arjun?sapologies.
The problem raised in the chapter is, as we have seen, how we
should recite his name if speaking ?Krishn? is an offence. The problemwas resolved as far back as Chapter 8 in which Lord Krishn laid downthe canon that worshipers should recite OM, the primal word or sound

Yatharth Geeta 318
that represents the all-pervading, pre-eminent, changeless God. OM is
the essence that prevails through the whole universe and which is hiddenwithin Lord Krishn. Worshipers were counselled to recite this sacredsyllable and concentrate on the form of Lord Krishn. Lord Krishn?s imageand OM are the keys to the success of a worshiper?s prayer andmeditation.
Arjun then pleaded with Lord Krishn to show him his four-armed
form and Lord Krishn did appear in his gentle, merciful form. He hadwanted to see the four-armed form, but what Lord Krishn reveals to himis the human form. In truth, the yogi who has attained to the omnipotent,eternal God lives in his body in this world and acts outwardly with histwo hands. But he is awake in his Soul and he also wakes upsimultaneously in the Soul of devotees who remember him fromanywhere to act as their guide-charioteer. Arms are a symbol of actionand this is the significance of the four-armed form.
Lord Krishn has told Arjun that no one besides him had seen this
form of his before and no one would be able to see it in the future. If wewere to take this literally, the Geeta would appear futile. But Lord Krishnhas resolved the problem by telling Arjun that it is easy for the worshiper,who is devoted to him with single-minded faith and who remembers noone else except him, to know him and his essence by direct perceptionand to become one with him. If Arjun knows Lord Krishn, it means thathe is such a devotee. Affection for the worshiped God is the distilledform of devotion. As Goswami Tulsidas has said, one cannot have Godwithout love. God has never been realized and can never be realized bya worshiper who is lacking in this feeling. In the absence of love, noamount of yog or prayer or charity or penance can enable a man toattain to God. So the sentiment of love is indispensable for finalattainment on the path of spiritual evolution.
In the last verse of the chapter Lord Krishn has pointed out the
fourfold way, comprising observance of yagya - the ordained action,total dependence upon and devotion to him, detachment from worldlyobjects and rewards, and, lastly, absence of malevolence towards all.

Chapter 11 319
So it is obvious that there can be no physical war or bloodshed in the
state of mind arrived at by following this fourfold way. When a worshiperhas dedicated all he has to God, remembers only him and no one else,is so firmly in control of his mind and senses that nature and its objectscease to exist for him, and when he is freed from all malignant feelings,the idea of his fighting an external war is simply impossible. To achievethe supreme goal by cutting down the dreadful enemy that the world iswith the sword of perfect renunciation is the only true victory after whichthere is no prospect of any defeat.
Thus concludes the Eleventh Chapter, in the Upanishad of the
Shreemadbhagwadgeeta, on the Knowledge of the Supreme
Spirit, the Discipline of Yog, and the Dialogue between
Lord Krishn and Arjun, entitled:
?Vishwroop Darshan Yog??
or
??Revelation of the Omnipresent??.
Thus concludes the Most Revered Paramhans Paramanand Ji?s
disciple Swami Adgadanand?s exposition of the Eleventh
Chapter of the Shreemadbhagwadgeeta in ??Yatharth Geeta??,
entitled: ?Vishwroop Darshan Yog??.
HARI OM TAT SAT

Chapter 12 321
CHAPTER 12
THE YOG
OF DEVOTION
Lord Krishn repeatedly told Arjun at the end of Chapter 11 that his
cosmic form which he had manifested to him had never been seen by
anyone before and would not be seen by anyone in the future. Ratherthan being known by penance or yagya or charity he can be easilyknown and approached-as Arjun has seen him-by unwavering devotionand contemplation which is constant and uninterrupted like a stream ofoil. So Arjun was exhorted to dedicate himself to Lord Krishn andremember him; he should perform the ordained deed and better still bysurrendering himself to him. Firm and single-minded devotion is themeans for achievement of the supreme goal. This naturally whets Arjun?scuriosity to know which one of the two kinds of devotees, they whoworship the manifest God like Lord Krishn and they who contemplatethe unmanifest Spirit, are superior.
In fact, Arjun has raised this question for the third time here. He
had asked Lord Krishn in Chapter 3 why he was urging him to undertakea dreadful task if he thought the Way of Knowledge superior to the Wayof Selfless Action. According to Lord Krishn in both ways action is anecessity.
Despite this, however, if a man restrains his senses with unnatural
violence and is yet unable to forget their objects, he is an arrogantimpostor rather than a man of knowledge. So Arjun was counselled todo the ordained task, the deed of yagya. The mode of yagya, which isa special form of worship and which provides access to the supremegoal, was then elucidated. What difference is there then between theWay of Knowledge and the Way of Selfless Action if the same action-the deed of yagya-has to be embarked on for both. Whereas an

Yatharth Geeta 322
Depeg&ve GJeeÛe-
SJeb meleleÙegòeâe Ùes YeòeâemlJeeb heÙeg&heemeles~Ùes ÛeehÙe#ejceJÙeòebâ les<eeb kesâ ÙeesieefJeòecee:~~1~~affectionate devotee engages in the deed of yagya after having
surrendered himself and his action to the desired God, the yogi ofknowledge undertakes the same action with a due understanding of hisown strength and reliance upon it.
Arjun further wished to know from Lord Krishn in Chapter 5 why
he sometimes commended action done by the Way of Knowledge andat other times that done by the Way of Selfless Action in a spirit of self-surrender. He wanted to be told which of the two was better. He knewby that time that action was a common factor in both the ways. And yethe put the question to Lord Krishn because he was faced with theproblem of choosing the superior way. He was told that although seekersattain to the desired goal by going along either of the ways, the Way ofSelfless Action is better than the Way of Knowledge. Without doingselfless action, a man can be neither a yogi nor truly enlightened. TheWay of Knowledge is also impossible to traverse without action and itis beset with more obstacles.
Now, for the third time, Arjun asks the Lord which of the two kinds
of devotees, they who are devoted to him with perfect concentrationand they who go along the Way of Knowledge contemplating theunmanifest, imperishable principle, are superior.
1. ?Arjun said, ?Which of the two kinds of steadfast devotees,
they who always worship you in your embodied form and
the others who meditate upon your imperishable, unmanifestSpirit, are superior in their mastery of yog?? ??
Whether they worship Lord Krishn with self-surrender, a sense of
identity with him, and with firm concentration, or they worship the
unmanifest and imperishable God in whom he dwells with self-reliancerather than self-surrender, they both follow the way ordained by him.Which of the two, however, are superior? Lord Krishn answers thequestion thus.
arjuna uvÂca-
evaØ satatayuktÂ ye bhaktÂstvÂØ paryupÂsate |ye cÂpyakîaramavyaktaØ teîÂØ ke yogavittamÂÉ ||1||

Chapter 12 323
ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
ceÙÙeeJesMÙe cevees Ùes ceeb efvelÙeÙegòeâe Gheemeles~ßeæÙee hejÙeeshesleemles ces Ùegòeâlecee celee:~~2~~
Ùes  lJe#ejceefveoxMÙeceJÙeòebâ  heÙeg&heemeles~
meJe&$eieceefÛevlÙeb Ûe ketâ?mLeceÛeueb OeÇgJeced~~3~~meefVeÙecÙesefvõÙe«eeceb meJe&$e meceyegæÙe:~
les ØeehvegJeefvle ceecesJe meJe&Yetleefnles jlee:~~4~~
keäuesMeesÓefOekeâlejmles<eeceJÙeòeâemeòeâÛeslemeeced~DeJÙeòeâe efn ieefleog&:Keb osnJeefÆjJeehÙeles~~5~~2. ?The Lord said, ?I believe them to be the most superior of all
yogi who always meditate upon me with concentration and
worship me - the embodied, manifest God - with true faith.??
3-4. ??And they who restrain all their senses well, always adore
the Supreme Spirit who is beyond thought, all-pervading,indefinable, filled with equanimity, immutable and
immovable, and formless and indestructible, with totalconcentration, and who serve all beings viewing them with
an equal eye, attain to me.??
These attributes of God are not different from those of Lord Krishn,
but-
5. ?Achievement of perfection by men who are devoted to the
formless God is more arduous, because they who feel
conceited because of their physical bodies find it more
difficult to realize the unmanifest.??
Accomplishment is harder for worshipers who are devoted to the
God who is devoid of all qualities (nirgun) because of their attachment
to their physical existence. Attainment of the unmanifest, formless God
is most difficult as long as a worshiper takes pride in his birth and
prowess.
Yogeshwar Krishn was a Godlike accomplished teacher and the
unmanifest God was manifested in him. According to him the seekerwho, instead of seeking shelter under a sage, goes ahead with trust in
his own strength, knowing his present situation and  what it will be in
ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-
mayyÂveïya mano ye mÂØ nityayuktÂ upÂsate |ïraddhayÂ parayopetÂste me yuktatamÂ matÂÉ ||2||
ye tvakîaramanirdeïyamavyaktaØ paryupÂsate |
sarvatragamacintyaØ ca köòasthamacalaØ dhruvam ||3||sanniyamyendriyagrÂmaØ sarvatra samabuddhayaÉ |
te prÂpnuvanti mÂmeva sarvabhötahite ratÂÉ ||4||
kleïo'dhikatarasteîÂmavyaktÂsaktÂcetasÂm |avyaktÂ hi gatirduÉkhaØ dehavadbhiravÂpyate ||5||

Yatharth Geeta 324
Ùes leg meJee&efCe keâcee&efCe ceefÙe meVÙemÙe celheje:~
DevevÙesvewJe  Ùeesiesve  ceeb  OÙeeÙevle  Gheemeles~~6~~les<eecenb  mecegælee&  ce=lÙegmebmeejmeeiejeled~
YeJeeefce veefÛejelheeLe& ceÙÙeeJesefMeleÛeslemeeced~~7~~
ceÙÙesJe ceve DeeOelmJe ceefÙe yegefæb efveJesMeÙe~efveJeefme<Ùeefme ceÙÙesJe Dele TOJeË ve mebMeÙe:~~8~~
DeLe efÛeòeb meceeOeelegb ve MeÄeâesef<e ceefÙe efmLejced~
DeYÙeemeÙeesiesve lelees ceeefceÛÚehlegb OeveÀeÙe~~9~~the time to come, and with the awareness that he  will ultimately realize
his own unmanifest, identical Self, begins to think that the SupremeSpirit is no different from him and that he is ?him.?? Entertaining suchthoughts and without waiting for fulfillment he begins to feel that hisbody itself is the real ?he.? So he wanders about in the mortal world, theabode of sorrows, and at last comes to a dead end. But this is not sowith the worshiper who goes ahead under Lord Krishn?s gracious shelter.
6-7. ?And, O Parth, I soon deliver my affectionate devotees who
have set their mind on me and who, coming under my shelter
and dedicating all their action to me, ever contemplate andworship me - the manifest God - with unshaken intentness,from the abyss of the mortal world.??
Lord Krishn then prompts Arjun to such devotion and throws light
upon the way by which it may be accomplished.8. ?There is no doubt whatsoever that you will dwell in me if
you devote and apply your mind and intellect to me.??Lord Krishn is conscious of his disciple?s weakness, for Arjun
has confessed earlier that he considers restraining the mind as difficult
as restraining the wind, So he hastens to add:
9. ??If you cannot firmly set your mind on me; O Dhananjay,
seek me by the yog of incessant practice (abhyas-yog).???Practice? here means repeated drawing back of the mind from
whereever it roams and fixing it upon the desired goal. But if Arjun  is
ye tu sarvÂài karmÂài mayi sannyasya matparÂÉ |
ananyenaiva yogena mÂØ dhyÂyanta upÂsate ||6||teîÂmahaØ samuddhartÂ mçtyusaØsÂrasÂgarÂt |
bhavÂmi nacirÂtpÂrtha mayyÂveïitacetasÂm ||7||
mayyeva mana Âdhatsva mayi buddhiØ niveïaya |nivasiîyasi mayyeva ata ördhvaØ na saØïayaÉ ||8||
atha cittaØ samÂdhÂtuØ na ïaknoîi mayi sthiram |
abhyÂsayogena tato mÂmicchÂptuØ dhanaájaya ||9||

Chapter 12 325
DeYÙeemesÓhÙemeceLeexÓefme celkeâce&hejcees YeJe~
ceoLe&ceefhe keâcee&efCe kegâJe&efvmeefæceJeehmÙeefme~~10~~DeLewleohÙeMeòeâesÓefme keâlegË ceÅeesieceeefßele:~
meJe&keâce&HeâuelÙeeieb lele: kegâ® ÙeleelceJeeved~~11~~
ßesÙees efn %eeveceYÙeemeep%eeveeæ?eeveb efJeefMe<Ùeles~OÙeeveelkeâce&HeâuelÙeeiemlÙeeieeÛÚeefvlejvevlejced~~12~~incapable even of this, he should just long for Lord Krishn-only devote
himself to his worship, If all his thoughts and actions are only for LordKrishn, he will have the fulfillment of realizing him.
10. ??In case you are incapable of even following the way of
practice, you may yet  secure fulfillment by the performance
of actions which are meant only for me.?
11. ?In case you fail to accomplish even this, abandon all the
fruits of action and take refuge in my yog with a thoroughlysubdued mind.??
If Arjun cannot even do this, he should give up all desire of the
rewards of action as well as considerations of profit and loss, and with
a sense of self-surrender find shelter under some sage with anaccomplished Soul. The ordained action will then  commencespontaneously under the prompting of this accomplished teacher.
12. ?Since knowledge is superior to practice, meditation better
than knowledge, and abandonment of the fruits of action
higher than meditation, renunciation is soon rewarded withpeace.??
To engage in action by the Way of Knowledge is better than just
the exercise of restraining the mind. Meditation is better than the
accomplishment of action through knowledge, because the desired goalis always present in contemplation. Even better than contemplation,however, is the abandonment of the fruits of action, for when Arjun hasgiven up the fruits of action and surrendered himself to the desired goalwith the purpose of realizing it, the burden of his exercise of yog is
abhyÂse'pyasamartho'si matkarmaparamo bhava |
madarthamapi karmÂài kurvansiddhimavÂpsyasi ||10||athaitadapyaïakto'si kartuØ madyogamÂïritaÉ |
sarvakarmaphalatyÂgaØ tataÉ kuru yatÂtmavÂØ ||11||
ïreyo hi jáÂnamabhyÂsÂjjáÂnÂddhyÂnaØ viïiîyate |dhyÂnÂtkarmaphalatyÂgastyÂgÂcchÂntiranantaram||12

Yatharth Geeta 326
DeÉs°e meJe&Yetleeveeb cew$e: keâ®Ce SJe Ûe~
efvece&cees efvejn¿ej: meceog:KemegKe: #eceer~~13mevleg°: meleleb Ùeesieer Ùeleelcee Â{efve§eÙe:~
ceÙÙee|heleceveesyegefæÙeex ceÆòeâ: me ces efØeÙe:~~14
ÙemceeVeesefÉpeles ueeskeâes ueeskeâeVeesefÉpeles Ûe Ùe:~n<ee&ce<e&YeÙeesÉsiewceg&òeâes Ùe: me Ûe ces efØeÙe:~~15borne by the adored God. So this kind of renunciation is soon followed
by the achievement of absolute peace.
Lord Krishn has so far said that the yogi who performs selfless
action with a sense of self-surrender has an advantage over the followerof the Way of Knowledge who worships the unmanifest. Both of themaccomplish the same action, but there are more hurdles in the way ofthe latter. He bears the responsibility for his profits and losses himself,whereas the burden of the dedicated worshiper is borne by God. So hesoon achieves peace as an outcome of his renunciation of the fruits ofaction. Lord Krishn now enumerates the attributes of the man who attainsto such tranquility.
13-14. ?The devotee who has malice towards none and loves all,
who is compassionate and free from attachment and vanity,
who views sorrow and joy equally and is forgiving, endowedwith steady yog, contented alike with both profit and loss,restrained in mind, and dedicated to me with firm conviction,is dear to me.?
15. ?The devotee who does not upset anyone, nor is upset by
anyone, and who is free from the contradictions of joy, envy,and fear, is dear to me.?
Apart from these qualities, this worshiper is also one who neither
agitates any being nor is agitated by any being, and who is free from
joy, misery, fear, and all such distractions. Such a worshiper is belovedof Lord Krishn.
adveîòÂ sarvabhötÂnÂØ maitraÉ karuàa eva ca |
nirmamo nirahaßkÂraÉ samaduÉkhasukhaÉ kîamÍ ||13||santuîòaÉ satataØ yogÍ yatÂtmÂ dçÅhaniïcayaÉ |
mayyarpitamanobuddhiryo madbhaktaÉ sa me priyaÉ ||14||
yasmÂnnodvijate loko lokÂnnodvijate ca yaÉ |harîÂmarîabhayodvegairmukto yaÉ sa ca me priyaÉ ||15||

Chapter 12 327
Devehes#e:  MegefÛeo&#e  Goemeervees  ieleJÙeLe:~
meJee&jcYeheefjlÙeeieer Ùees ceÆòeâ: me ces efØeÙe:~~16
Ùees ve ù<Ùeefle ve Ésef° ve MeesÛeefle ve keâe*d#eefle~
MegYeeMegYeheefjlÙeeieer YeefòeâceevÙe: me ces efØeÙe:~~17This verse is most salutary for worshipers, for they should so
conduct themselves that they do not hurt anyone?s feeling. They have
to be so, although others will not act in the same way. Being worldly-minded they cannot but indulge in venomous fulminations.  However,whatever they say to denounce and hurt should not disturb and interruptthe seeker?s meditation. Whatever they do, his thoughts should besteadily and constantly set on the coveted God. It is his duty to protecthimself from the onslaughts of men who are-as it were-intoxicated andout of their senses.
16. ?The devotee who is emancipated from desire, pure,
dexterous at his task, impartial, free from sorrow, and who
has achieved the state of actionlessness, is dear to me.?
That man is pure who is liberated from desire. ?Dexterous? means
that he is adept in worship and meditation, the one ordained action. He
is unaffected by fortune and misfortune, free from sorrow, and one whohas given up all undertakings because there is left no worthwhileenterprise on which he can embark.
17. ?The devotee who is neither joyous nor envious, neither
troubled nor concerned, and who has given up all good and
evil actions, is dear to me.?
This is the crowning point of devotion when the worshiper is not
wanting in anything that is worthy nor in possession of anything that is
impious. The worshiper who has reached this stage is dear to LordKrishn.
anapekîaÉ ïucirdakîa udÂsÍno gatavyathaÉ |
sarvÂrambhaparityÂgÍ yo madbhaktaÉ sa me priyaÉ16
yo na hçîyati na dveîòi na ïocati na kaßkîati |
ïubhÂïubhaparityÂgÍ bhaktimÂnyaÉ sa me priyaÉ17

Yatharth Geeta 328
18-19. ?The steady worshiper, who regards friends and foes,
honour and dishonour, cold and heat, happiness and sorrow
as equal, and all the dispositions of whose inner realm aretotally stilled; who is detached from the world, indifferent toslander and praise, meditative, contented with any mannerof physical sustenance, who has reached the highest elevationof intense devotion and free from infatuation for the placewhere he dwells, is dear to me.??
20. ?And the devotees who rest in me and taste well the aforesaid
nectar of dharm in a spirit of selflessness are the dearest tome.??
In the concluding verse of the chapter, Lord Krishn adds that he
loves those devotees most who take refuge in him and partake well of
the aforesaid imperishable substance of dharm.
???????????????
At the close of the last chapter, Lord Krishn told Arjun that neither
had anyone seen him earlier nor would anyone see him later as he hadbeheld him. But one who worships him with steady devotion and affectionis able to see him, know his essence, and become one with him. Inother words, the Supreme Spirit is an entity who can be realized. SoArjun should be a loving devotee.
At the outset of the present chapter, Arjun wished to know from
Lord Krishn which of the two kinds of devotees, they who worship himwith single-minded dedication and they who contemplate theimperishable, unmanifest God, are superior. According to Lord Krishn,he is realized by devotees of both kinds because he too is unmanifest.
mece: Me$eew Ûe efce$es Ûe leLee ceeveeheceeveÙees:~
Meerlees<CemegKeog:Kes<eg mece: meÁefJeJee|pele:~~18~~
leguÙeefvevoemlegefleceezveer mevleg°es Ùesve kesâveefÛeled~Deefvekesâle: efmLejceefleYe&efòeâceevces efØeÙees vej:~~19~~
Ùes  leg  OecÙee&ce=leefceob  ÙeLeesòebâ  heÙeg&heemeles~
ßeöOeevee celhejcee YeòeâemlesÓleerJe ces efØeÙee:~~20~~samaÉ ïatrau ca mitre ca tathÂ mÂnÂpamÂnayoÉ |
ïÍtoîàasukhaduÉkheîu samaÉ saßgavivarjitaÉ ||18||
tulyanindÂstutirmaunÍ santuîòo yena kenacit |aniketaÉ sthiramatirbhaktimÂnme priyo naraÉ ||19||
ye tu dharmÂmçtamidaØ yathoktaØ paryupÂsate |
ïraddadhÂnÂ matparamÂ bhaktÂste'tÍva me priyÂÉ20

Chapter 12 329
However, there are more painful hurdles in the path of seekers who are
dedicated to the unmanifest God with a well-restrained mind. So longas the shell of the physical body remains, attainment of the  formlessGod is painful, because this unmanifest form is attained only when themind is thoroughly subdued and dissolved. Before that stage his bodyitself stands as an obstruction in the worshiper?s way. Saying againand again- ?I am.?-?I am.?-?I have to attain.?-he at last turns to his bodyitself. There is thus a greater chance of his stumbling on the way. SoArjun should surrender all his actions to Lord Krishn and remember himwith steady devotion, for he soon liberates from the dark chasm of theworld devotees who meditate upon him with the unbroken constancy ofa stream of oil, with total dependence on him, and after resigning alltheir actions to him. So the way of affectionate devotion is the mostsuperior.
Arjun should aim his mind at Lord Krishn. If he cannot thus control
his mind, however, he should take to the way of constant practice. Heshould withdraw his mind again and again from wherever it strays andrestrain it. If he is unable to do this, either, he should just engage inaction. The action is only one-the deed of yagya. He should just go ondoing what is fit to be done, and do nothing else. Whether successcomes to him or not, he should persevere with the ordained action. If,unfortunately, he is incapable of even this, he should renounce thefruits of all action and find shelter under a sage who has known reality,realized his Self, and dwells in the Supreme Spirit. This renunciationwill bring him the ultimate peace.
Thereafter, Lord Krishn has enumerated attributes of the devotee
who achieves such peace. Free from ill-will towards all beings, he isendowed with compassion and pity. Free equally from attachment andvanity, this devotee is beloved of Lord Krishn. The worshiper who isever absorbed in contemplation, self-possessed, and dwelling in hisSoul is dear to him. The seeker who neither hurts anyone nor is hurt byanyone is dear to him. The devotee who is pure, dexterous in his task,beyond all sorrow, and who has steered his way across by renouncing

Yatharth Geeta 330
all desire and good as well as evil actions, is dear to him. The steady,
enlightened, and loving devotee who is equable and uncomplaining inboth glory and ignominy, whose mind and senses are restrained andstilled, who is contented with any manner of living, and free fromattachment to the body in which he dwells, is dear to him.
This enumeration of the way of life of worshipers who have attained
to the ultimate peace continues from the eleventh to the nineteenthverse, which are therefore of great value to seekers. Giving the finalverdict at last, Lord Krishn tells Arjun that devotees of steady faith whocast themselves at his mercy and mould their conduct with a spirit ofselflessness  according to the  eternal, indestructible nectar of dharmwhich he has enunciated before, are the dearest to him. So engaging inthe appointed task in a spirit of total self-surrender is the best course,because in this way the responsibility for the worshiper?s gains andlosses is borne by his noble teacher-preceptor. At this point Lord Krishnalso points out the attributes of sages who dwell in the Supreme Spiritand counsels Arjun to find shelter under them. At the very end, byprompting Arjun to take refuge in him, he declares himself on par withthese sages. Lord Krishn was a yogi and enlightened soul.
Since ??devotion?? is said to be the most superior way in this
chapter, it is appropriate to name it ??The Yog of Devotion.??
Thus concludes the Twelfth Chapter, in the Upanishad of the
Shreemadbhagwadgeeta, on the Knowledge of the Supreme
Spirit, the Discipline of  Yog, and the Dialogue between
Lord Krishn and Arjun, entitled:
?Bhakti Yog?? or ??The Yog of Devotion??.
Thus concludes the Most Revered Paramhans Paramanand Ji?s
disciple Swami Adgadanand?s exposition of the Twelfth Chapter
of the Shreemadbhagwadgeeta in ??Yatharth Geeta??, entitled:
?Bhakti Yog??.
HARI OM TAT SAT

Chapter 13 331
CHAPTER 13
THE SPHERE OF ACTION
AND ITS KNOWER
At the very outset of the Geeta Dhritrashtr asked Sanjay what
had been done by his and Pandu?s sons assembled at Dharmkshetr, at
Kurukshetr, for combat. But it has not been made clear so far wherethat field or sphere is. It is only in the present chapter that Lord Krishnmakes a precise declaration of the location of the sphere.
1. ?The Lord said, This body is, O son of Kunti, a battlefield
(kshetr) and the men who know it (kshetragya) are called wise
because they have grown spiritually dexterous by perceiving
its essence.??
Instead of being involved in this sphere, the kshetragya dominate
it. So it has been said by sages who knew and comprehended its reality.
When the body is only one, how can there be two spheres-
Dharmkshetr and Kurukshetr-in it? In truth, within the one body there
exist two distinct, primeval instincts. There is first the pious treasure of
divinity that provides access to the Supreme Spirit who stands for themost sublime dharm. On the other hand, there are the demoniacalimpulses made up of impiety which lead a man to accept the mortalworld as real. When there is abundance of divinity in the realm of theheart, the body is transmuted into a Dharmkshetr (field of dharm), but it
degenerates into a Kurukshetr when it is  dominated by devilish forces.
This process of alternate rise and fall, of ascent and descent, operatesat all times, but a decisive war commences between the two opposing
ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
Fob  Mejerjb  keâewvlesÙe  #es$eefcelÙeefYeOeerÙeles~
SleÅees Jesefòe leb Øeeng: #es$e%e Fefle leefÉo:~~1~~ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-
idaØ ïarÍraØ kaunteya kîetramityabhidhÍyate |
etadyo vetti taØ prÂhuÉ kîetrajáa iti tadvidaÉ ||1||

Yatharth Geeta 332
#es$e%eb Ûeeefhe ceeb efJeefæ meJe&#es$es<eg Yeejle~
#es$e#es$e%eÙees%ee&veb Ùeòep%eeveb celeb cece~~2~~lel#es$eb ÙeÛÛe ÙeeÂkeäÛe ÙeefÉkeâeefj Ùele§e Ùeled~
me Ûe Ùees ÙelØeYeeJe§e lelmeceemesve ces ëe=Ceg~~3~~impulses when an earnest devotee engages in the task of worship in
association with a sage who has perceived the reality. Gradually, then,while the treasure of divinity  grows, impious impulses are enfeebled
and destroyed. The stage of God-realization is reached only after the
complete elimination of the ill-gotten hoard of unrighteousness. Andeven the utility  of the treasure of divinity is dispensed with after thestage of perception, for it is also then subsumed in the Revered God. InChapter 11, Arjun saw after the Kaurav also the warriors of his ownarmy plunging and vanishing into the mouth of the all-pervading God.
Kshetragya is the character of the Self after this final dissolution.
2. ?And be it known to you, O Bharat, that I am the all-knowing
Self (kshetragya) in all spheres; and to me awareness of the
reality of kshetr and kshetragya, of mutable nature and theSelf, is knowledge.??
The one who knows the reality of the sphere of the body is a
kshetragya. This is vouched for by sages who have known the essence
of this sphere by direct experience. Now Lord Krishn proclaims that he
too is a kshetragya. In other words, he too was a yogi-indeed aYogeshwar. Perception of the reality of kshetr and kshetragya, of naturewith its contradictions and the Soul, is knowledge. Knowledge is notmere dispute.
3. ?Listen to me briefly on the whence and what of that sphere
and its variations and properties, as well on the kshetragya
and his abilities.??
The sphere of action, of life and death, is mutable because it has
evolved from some cause, whereas the kshetragya is  possessed of
kîetrajáaØ cÂpi mÂØ viddhi sarvakîetreîu bhÂrata |
kîetrakîetrajáayorjáÂnaØ yattajjáÂnaØ mataØ mama ||2||tatkîetraØ yacca yÂdçkca yadvikÂri yataïca yat |
sa ca yo yatprabhÂvaïca tatsamÂsena me ïçàu ||3||

Chapter 13 333
$e+ef<eefYeye&ngOee ieerleb ÚvoesefYeefJe&efJeOew: he=Lekeâd~
yeÇÿemet$eheow§ewJe      nslegceefÆefJe&efveef§elew:~~4~~
ceneYetleevÙen¿ejes  yegefæjJÙeòeâcesJe  Ûe~FefvõÙeeefCe oMewkebâ Ûe heÃe ÛesefvõÙeieesÛeje:~~5~~
FÛÚe És<e: megKeb og:Keb me?ele§eslevee Oe=efle:~
Slel#es$eb  meceemesve  meefJekeâejcegoeùleced~~6~~authority. It is not only Lord Krishn who says this; other sages have
also said the same.
4. ?This has (also) been said in various distinct ways by sages
in different scriptural verses and well-reasoned, definitive
aphorisms on the knowledge of the Supreme Spirit(Brahmsutr).?
That is to say that Vedant, great sages, Brahmsutr, and Lord
Krishn all say the same thing. Lord Krishn is, therefore, only saying
what others have already said. Is the corporal body just what is visible
of it? The question is taken up in the following verse.
5-6. ?Speaking briefly, mutable physical body is the aggregate of
the five elements, ego, intellect, even the unmanifest, the ten
sense organs, mind and the five objects of sense, as well asdesire, malice, pleasure and pain, and intelligence andfortitude.?
Summarizing the constitution of the body which is kshetr with all
its variants, Lord Krishn tells Arjun that it is made up of the five great
elements (earth, water, fire, ether, and air), ego, intellect and thought(which, instead of being named, has been called the unmanifest,metaphysical nature), and thus throws light upon primal nature with itseight parts. Apart from this the other components are the ten senses(eyes, ears, nose, skin, tongue, organ of taste, hands, feet, genital
organ, and anus), mind, the five objects of sense (form, taste, smell,
sound, and touch), desire, malice, pleasure and pain, and consciousness
çîibhirbahudhÂ gÍtaØ chandobhirvividhaiÉ pçthak |
brahmasötrapadaiïcaiva hetumadbhirviniïcitaiÉ ||4||
mahÂbhötÂnyahaßkÂro buddhiravyaktameva ca |indriyÂài daïaikaØ ca paáca cendriyagocarÂÉ ||5||
icchÂ dveîaÉ sukhaØ duÉkhaØ saßghÂtaïcetanÂ dhçtiÉ|
etatkîetraØ samÂsena savikÂramudÂhçtam ||6||

Yatharth Geeta 334
DeceeefvelJeceoefcYelJeceefnbmee #eeefvlejepe&Jeced~
DeeÛeeÙeexheemeveb MeewÛeb mLewÙe&ceelceefJeefve«en:~~7~~
FefvõÙeeLex<eg  JewjeiÙeceven¿ej  SJe  Ûe~
pevcece=lÙegpejeJÙeeefOeog:Keoes<eevegoMe&veced~~8~~and calm courage. The body, the gross corporal frame, is the composite
of all these parts. This in brief is kshetr and the good or bad seedssown in it sprout as sanskar. Made up   of components which have
evolved from a previous source or nature (prakriti), the body must exist
so long as these components survive.
Let us now see the attributes of the kshetragya who is uninvolved
in and free from this kshetr:
7. ?Absence of pride and arrogant conduct, disinclination to do
injury to anyone, forgiveness, integrity of thought and speech,
devoted service to the teacher, outward as well as inner purity,
moral firmness, restraint of the body along with the mindand senses, ...??
These are only some of the attributes of the kshetragya:
indifference to honour and dishonour, freedom from vanity, and
reluctance to hurt anyone (ahinsa). Ahinsa does not only mean desistingfrom acts of physical violence. Lord Krishn told Arjun earlier that he
ought not to degrade his Soul. To lead the Soul to degradation is true
violence (hinsa), whereas to elevate it is non-violence (ahinsa). A manwho is inclined to the amelioration of his own Soul is also activelydevoted to the well-being of other Souls. It is true, though, that thisvirtue has its inception from not hurting others; the one is but a necessaryconcomitant of the other. So ahinsa, mercy, honest thought and speech,
faithful service to and worship of the teacher, purity, firmness of mind
and heart, and control of the body along with the mind and senses, and-
8. ?Disinterest in pleasures of both the world and heaven,
absence of ego, constant reflection over the maladies of birth,
death, old age, sickness, and pain,...??
amÂnitvamadambhitvamahiØsÂ kîÂntirÂrjavam |
ÂcÂryopÂsanaØ ïaucaØ sthairyamÂtmavinigrahaÉ ||7||
indriyÂrtheîu vairÂgyamanahaßkÂra eva ca |
janmamçtyujarÂvyÂdhiduÉkhadoîÂnudarïanam ||8||

Chapter 13 335
DemeefòeâjveefYe<JeÁ: heg$eoejie=neefo<eg~
efvelÙeb Ûe meceefÛeòelJeefce°eefve°esheheefòe<eg~~9~~
ceefÙe ÛeevevÙeÙeesiesve YeefòeâjJÙeefYeÛeeefjCeer~
efJeefJeòeâosMemesefJelJecejeflepe&vemebmeefo   ~~10~~DeOÙeelce%eeveefvelÙelJeb leòJe%eeveeLe&oMe&veced~
Slep%eeveefceefle Øeesòeâce%eeveb ÙeoleesÓvÙeLee~~11~~9. ?Detachment from son, wife, wealth, home and the like,
freedom from infatuation, bearing with both the pleasant and
the unpleasant with equanimity (ascetic fervour for kshetragya
initiates in the circumstance of having wife, son and domestic
stages of life)...??
10. ?Unswerving devotion to me with a single-minded concern
for yog, fondness of living in sequestered places, distastefor human society,...?
Fixing the mind firmly on Lord Krishn, a Yogeshwar, or on some
sage like him, so that there is remembrance of nothing else except yog
and devout contemplation of nothing besides the desired goal, dwellingin solitary places, disinterest in the company of men, and-
11. ??Constantly resting in the awareness of Soul is called
adhyatm and perception of the Supreme Spirit who is the
end of realization of truth are all knowledge and whatever iscontrary to them is ignorance.??
Adhyatm is knowledge of God?s dominance. The awareness that
is derived from a direct perception of the Supreme Spirit, the ultimate
essence, is knowledge. Lord Krishn said in Chapter 4 that the man whotastes the manna of knowledge generated by the accomplishment ofyagya becomes one with the eternal God. Here, too, he says thatapprehension of the reality that the Supreme Spirit is knowledge.
Whatever is opposed towards it is ignorance. The aforesaid attributes
such as an equanimous attitude to honour and dishonour complementthis knowledge. The discussion of the problem is now concluded.
asaktiranabhiîvaßgaÉ putradÂragçhÂdiïu |
nityaØ ca samacittatvamiîòÂniîòopapattiîu ||9||
mayi cÂnanyayogena bhaktiravyabhicÂriàÍ |
viviktadeïasevitvamaratirjanasaØsadi ||10||adhyÂtmajáÂnanityatvaØ tattvajáÂnÂrthadarïanam |
etajjáÂnamiti proktamajáÂnaØ yadato'nyathÂ ||11||

Yatharth Geeta 336
%esÙeb ÙeòelØeJe#Ùeeefce Ùep%eelJeece=leceMvegles~
Deveeefocelhejb yeÇÿe ve meòeVeemeogÛÙeles~~12~~
meJe&le:heeefCeheeob lelmeJe&leesÓef#eefMejescegKeced~meJe&le:ßegefleceuueeskesâ meJe&ceeJe=lÙe efle?efle~~13~~
meJexefvõÙeiegCeeYeemeb meJexefvõÙeefJeJeefpe&leced~
Demeòebâ meJe&Ye=ÛÛewJe efveieg&Ceb iegCeYeesòe=â Ûe~~14~~12. ??I shall discourse to you well upon the God without a
beginning or end, who is worthy of being known and after
knowing whom the stuff of immortality is gained and who is
said to be neither a being nor a non-being??
Lord Krishn promises to enlighten Arjun well on that which ought
to be known and after knowing which the mortal man achieves the
quality of deathlessness. The ultimate God who is without a beginningand end is said to be neither a being nor a non-being, because so longas he is removed he is an entity, but who can say what he is when a
worshiper-a-sage-is assimilated in him. Now there is only a single entity
and the consciousness of otherness is obliterated. In such a state Godis neither an entity nor a non-entity; he is only that which is spontaneouslyperceived.
Lord Krishn now elaborates the ways of this great Soul:
13. ?He has hands and feet, eyes, heads, mouths, and ears on all
sides, because he exists pervading all in the world.??
14. ?Knowing the objects of all senses he is yet without senses;
unattached to and beyond the properties of nature he is yetthe sustainer of all; and he is also the one into whom all theproperties merge.??
Devoid of senses, unattached, and beyond the properties of matter,
he yet sustains all and is the enjoyer of all properties. As Lord Krishn
has said before, he is the enjoyer of all yagya and penances. All the
three properties are thus dissolved in him at last.
jáeyaØ yattatpravakîyÂmi yajjáÂtvÂmçtamaïnute |
anÂdimatparaØ brahma na sattannÂsaducyate ||12||
sarvataÉ pÂàipÂdaØ tatsarvato'kîiïiromukham |sarvataÉ ïrutimalloke sarvamÂvçtya tiîòhati ||13||
sarvendriyagunÂbhÂsaØ sarvendriyavivarjitam |
asaktaØ sarvabhçccaiva nirguàaØ guàabhoktç ca ||14||

Chapter 13 337
yeefnjvle§e  YetleeveeceÛejb  ÛejcesJe  Ûe~
met#celJeeòeoefJe%esÙeb otjmLeb Ûeeefvlekesâ Ûe leled~~15~~
DeefJeYeòebâ Ûe Yetles<eg efJeYeòeâefceJe Ûe efmLeleced~
YetleYele&= Ûe lep%esÙeb «eefme<Ceg ØeYeefJe<Ceg Ûe~~16~~pÙeesefle<eeceefhe leppÙeeseflemleceme: hejcegÛÙeles~
%eeveb %esÙeb %eeveiecÙeb ùefo meJe&mÙe efJeef?leced~~17~~15. ?Existing in all animate and inanimate beings, he is both
animate and inanimate; he is also unmanifest because he is
so subtle, and both distant and close.??
He is all-pervading, both animate and inanimate, imperceptible
because of his fineness, beyond knowing by the mind and the senses,
and both close and far away.
16. ?The Supreme Spirit who is worth knowing, and who appears
to be different in different beings although he is one and
undivided, is the begetter, sustainer, and destroyer of all
beings.??
Both external and inner phenomena have been indicated here: for
instance, external birth and inner awakening, external sustenance and
inner adherence to the beneficial yog, external change of body andinner dissolution of all, that is, the disintegration of the causes that leadto the generation of beings, and along with this dissolution-access tothe identical God. These are all attributes of that Supreme Being.
17. ?The light among lights and said to be beyond darkness,
that God, the embodiment of knowledge, worthy of being
known, and attainable only through knowledge, dwells in thehearts of all.??
The awareness that comes with intuitive perception is knowledge.
And by this knowledge alone can there be realization of God. He dwells
in the hearts of all; the heart is his dwelling and we cannot find him if we
search for him anywhere else. Therefore, it is laid down by the canon
bahirantaïca bhötÂnÂmacaraØ carameva ca |
sökîmatvÂttadavijáeyaØ dörasthaØ cÂntike ca tat ||15||
avibhaktaØ ca bhöteîu vibhaktamiva ca sthitam |
bhötabhartç ca tajjáeyaØ grasiîàu prabhaviîàu ca ||16||jyotiîÂmapi tajjyotistamasaÉ paramucyate |
jáÂnaØ jáeyaØ jáÂnagamyaØ hçdi sarvasya viîòhitam ||17||

Yatharth Geeta 338
Fefle #es$eb leLee %eeveb %esÙeb Ûeesòebâ meceemele:~
ceÆòeâ SleefÉ%eeÙe ceÆeJeeÙeesheheÅeles~~18~~Øeke=âefleb heg®<eb ÛewJe efJeæ?eveeoer GYeeJeefhe~
efJekeâejeb§e iegCeeb§ewJe efJeefæ Øeke=âeflemecYeJeeved~~19~~
keâeÙe&keâjCekeâle=&lJes nsleg: Øeke=âefle®ÛÙeles~heg®<e: megKeog:Keeveeb Yeesòe=âlJes nsleg®ÛÙeles~~20~~that God can be attained only through inner contemplation and conduct
of yog.
18. ?Knowing the truth of what has been briefly said of kshetr,
knowledge, and of God, who ought to be known, my devotee
attains to my state.??
Lord Krishn now makes use of the terms ?nature? (prakriti) and
?Soul? (purush) for what he earlier described as kshetr and kshetragya.19. ?Be it known to you that both nature and Soul are without
beginning and end, and also that maladies such as
attachment, revulsion, and all the objects that are possessed
of the three properties are born from nature.??
20. ?Whereas nature is said to be the begetter of deed and doer,
the Soul is said to be begetter of the experience of pleasureand pain.??
Nature is said to generate deed and the agent by whom a deed is
accomplished. Discrimination and renunciation are the doers of good,
while passion and anger are the doers of evil deeds. On the contrary,
the Soul engenders feelings of pleasure and pain. Will man alwayscontinue to suffer, we may well ask, or will he also ever be rid of it? Howcan one be liberated from nature and Soul when both of them are eternal?Lord Krishn speaks of this.
iti kîetraØ tathÂ jáÂnaØ jáeyaØ coktaØ samÂsataÉ |
madbhakta etadvijáÂya madbhÂvÂyopapadyate ||18||prakçtiØ puruîaØ caiva viddhyanÂdÍ ubhÂvapi |
vikÂrÂØïca guàÂØïcaiva viddhi prakçtisambhavÂn ||19
kÂryakÂraàakartçtve hetuÉ prakçtirucyate |puruîaÉ sukhaduÉkhÂnÂØ bhoktçtve heturucyate ||20||

Chapter 13 339
heg®<e: Øeke=âeflemLees efn Yeg*ddòesâ Øeke=âeflepeeviegCeeved~
keâejCeb  iegCemeÁesÓmÙe  meomeÅeessefvepevcemeg~~21~~Gheõ°evegcevlee Ûe Yelee& Yeesòeâe censÕej:~
hejceelcesefle ÛeehÙegòeâes osnsÓefmcevheg®<e: hej:~~22~~21. ?The nature-based Soul experiences nature-born objects
which are characterized by the three properties and it is
association with these properties that is the cause of his birth
in higher or lower forms.??
That means that liberation from birth and death is to be had only
after the cessation of the properties of nature which prompt them. Lord
Krishn then tells Arjun how the Soul dwells amidst nature.
22. ?Although residing in the body, the Soul is transcendental
and said to be the witness, the granter, the sustainer, the
enjoyer, and the great God and Supreme Spirit.?
The Soul dwelling in the sphere of the heart is even closer than
one?s hands, feet, and mind. Whether we do good or evil, he is
unconcerned. He just stands as a witness-an onlooker (updrashta).When the right course of worship is taken and the wayfarer rises a littlehigher, the approach of the witnessing Soul changes and he becomesthe granter (anumanta). Now he begins to grant and confer intuitions.
When the seeker is yet closer to the goal by further spiritual discipline,
the Soul begins to support and sustain (bharta). Now he also providesthe propitious yog. Then he turns into the enjoyer (bhokta) when theworship is even more refined. He accepts whatever yagya or penanceis performed, and at the stage after this acceptance he is transformedinto the great God (Maheshwar). He is now master of nature, but since
he is  master of nature it follows that nature yet abides in some part of
him. At even a higher stage than this, after the Soul is endowed withthe attributes of the ultimate, he comes to be known as the SupremeSpirit. Thus, although dwelling in the body, this Soul or Purush is yet
puruîaÉ prakçtistho hi bhußkte prakçtijÂnguàÂn |
kÂraàaØ guàasaßgo'sya sadasadyonijanmasu ||21||upadraîòÂnumantÂ ca bhartÂ bhoktÂ maheïvaraÉ |
paramÂtmeti cÂpyukto dehe'sminpuruîaÉ paraÉ ||22||

Yatharth Geeta 340
Ùe SJeb Jesefòe heg®<eb Øeke=âefleb Ûe iegCew: men~
meJe&Lee Jele&ceeveesÓefhe ve me YetÙeesÓefYepeeÙeles~~23~~OÙeevesveelceefve heMÙeefvle kesâefÛeoelceeveceelcevee~
DevÙes mee*ddKÙesve Ùeesiesve keâce&Ùeesiesve Ûeehejs~~24~~transcendental-quite beyond nature. The only difference is that whereas
he is a witness at the beginning, by gradual ascent after touching theultimate he is transformed into the Supreme Spirit himself.
23. ?In whatever manner he conducts himself, the man who
knows the truth of the Soul and nature with its three properties
is never born again.??
This is salvation. Yogeshwar Krishn has so far spoken to Arjun
on the freedom from rebirth which is the final outcome of the intuitive
knowledge of God and nature. But he now stresses yog whose mode is
worship, for attainment is impossible without the accomplishment of
this action.
24. ?While some perceive the Supreme Spirit in their heart by
contemplation with their refined mind, some others know
him by the yog of knowledge, and yet others by the yog ofaction.?
Some men perceive the Supreme Spirit in the realm of their heart
by inner remembrance and meditation. Some others engage in the same
task by Sankhya Yog or the Way of Discrimination and Knowledgeafter a due appraisal of their strength. And yet others see him by theWay of Selfless Action. The chief means pointed out in the verse aboveis meditation. The Way of Knowledge and the Way of Selfless Actionare the two modes of embarking on this deed of meditation and worship.
25. ?But ignorant of these ways, there are yet others who worship
by just learning the truth from accomplished sages and,
relying upon what they hear, they also doubtlessly steeracross the gulf of the mortal world.??
ya evaØ vetti puruîaØ prakçtiØ ca guàaiÉ saha |
sarvathÂ vartamÂno'pi na sa bhöyo'bhijÂyate ||23||dhyÂnenÂtmani païyanti kecidÂtmÂnamÂtmanÂ |
anye sÂßkhyena yogena karmayogena cÂpare ||24||

Chapter 13 341
DevÙes lJesJecepeevevle: ßeglJeevÙesYÙe Gheemeles~
lesÓefhe ÛeeeflelejvlÙesJe ce=lÙegb ßegeflehejeÙeCee:~~25~~
ÙeeJelmeÀeeÙeles efkeâefÃelmeòJeb mLeeJejpeÁceced~
#es$e#es$e%emebÙeesieeòeefÉefæ      Yejle<e&Ye~~26~~meceb  meJex<eg  Yetles<eg  efle?vleb  hejcesÕejced~
efJeveMÙelmJeefJeveMÙevleb Ùe: heMÙeefle me heMÙeefle~~27~~So, if we can do nothing else, we should at least seek the company
of accomplished sage.
26. ?Remember, O the best of Bharat, that whatever animate or
inanimate being exists is born from the coming together of
the insentient kshetr and the sentient kshetragya,?
On the state in which the final attainment is made, Lord Krishn
has this to say:27. ?He alone knows the truth who steadily sees the imperishable
God in all animate and inanimate beings that are destructible.
That Soul alone apprehends reality who has a steady perception
of the immortal God in the animate and inanimate beings that are
annihilated in their own special ways. In other words, he is of the stateof the Supreme Spirit only after the characteristic destruction of thatnature, never before it. The same idea was expressed in the third versein Chapter 8 when Lord Krishn pronounced that the destruction of thatcondition of beings which generates good or evil impressions (sanskar)
is the culmination of action. Action is then complete. He means the
same when he now declares that only he knows the truth who is steadilyaware of the presence of eternal God in perishable animate and inanimatebeings.
anye tvevamajÂnantaÉ ïrutvÂnyebhya upÂsate |
te'pi cÂtitarantyeva mçtyuØ ïrutiparÂyaàÂÉ ||25||
yÂvatsaájÂyate kiácitsattvaØ sthÂvarajaßgamam |
kîetrakîetrajáasaØyogÂttadviddhi bharatarîabha 26samaØ sarveîu bhöteîu tiîòhantaØ parameïvaram |
vinaïyatsvavinaïyantaØ yaÉ païyati sa païyati ||27||

Yatharth Geeta 342
28. ?He achieves the supreme goal because, evenly perceiving
the existence of the identical God in all beings, he does not
himself degrade his Self.?
He does not destroy himself because he constantly sees God as
akin to his own Self. So he attains to the final bliss of salvation. Now
the qualities of the accomplished Soul are pointed out.
29. ?And that man knows the truth who regards all action as
performed by nature and his own Soul as a non-doer.??Viewing all action as accomplished by nature implies that he sees
the occurrence of action only as long as nature survives. He also sees
the Soul as a non-agent and thus he comes by awareness of reality.
30. ?He realizes God when he sees the whole variety of beings
as resting upon and as an extension of the will of that one
Supreme Spirit.?
When a man sees the diffusion of God through the various states
of beings and regards them as but an extension of the same God, he
attains to him. No sooner is this stage reached than he realizes God.
This, too, is an attribute of a sage-a great Soul-with a steady wisdom.
31. ?Although embodied, the imperishable Supreme Spirit is
neither a doer nor tainted because, O son of Kunti, he is
without beginning or end and transcending all properties.?
meceb heMÙeefvn meJe&$e meceJeefmLeleceerÕejced~
ve efnvemlÙeelceveelceeveb lelees Ùeeefle hejeb ieefleced~~28~~Øeke=âlÙewJe Ûe keâcee&efCe ef?eâÙeceeCeeefve meJe&Me:~
Ùe: heMÙeefle leLeelceevecekeâlee&jb me heMÙeefle~~29~~
Ùeoe Yetlehe=LeiYeeJeceskeâmLecevegheMÙeefle~lele SJe Ûe efJemleejb yeÇÿe mecheÅeles leoe~~30~~
DeveeefolJeeefVeieg&CelJeelhejceelceeÙeceJÙeÙe:  ~
MejerjmLeesÓefhe keâewvlesÙe ve keâjesefle ve efuehÙeles~~31~~samaØ païyanhi sarvatra samavasthitamÍïvaram |na hinastyÂtmanÂtmÂnaØ tato yÂti parÂØ gatim ||28||prakçtyaiva ca karmÂài kriyamÂàÂni sarvaïaÉ |
yaÉ païyati tathÂtmÂnamakartÂraØ sa païyati ||29||
yadÂ bhötapçthagbhÂvamekasthamanupaïyati |tata eva ca vistÂraØ brahma sanpadyate tadÂ ||30||
anÂditvÂnnirguàatvÂtparamÂtmÂyamavyayaÉ |
ïarÍrastho'pi kaunteya na karoti na lipyate ||31||

Chapter 13 343
How it is so is illustrated in the following verse:
32. ?As the all-extensive sky is unsullied because of its subtlety,
even so the embodied Soul is neither a doer nor tainted
because he is beyond all the properties.??
It is further said of him:
33. ?The Soul illuminates the whole kshetr just as the one sun
lights up the entire world.??Then follows the final verdict:
34. ?They who have thus perceived the distinction between kshetr
and kshetragya, and the way of liberation from the maladies
of nature, with the eye of wisdom attain to the Supreme Spirit.?
Sages who know the difference between nature and Soul, as also
the way of liberation from mutable nature, realize God.
That is to say that knowledge is the eye with which one may see
the reality of kshetr and kshetragya, and that knowledge here is a
synonym for intuitive perception.
???????????????
Dharmkshetr and Kurukshetr were named right at the beginning
of the Geeta but they were not located, and it is only in the presentchapter that Lord Krishn points out to Arjun that the human body itselfis kshetr. And the one who knows it is a kshetragya. However, ratherthan being entangled in it he is liberated, and he provides direction to it.
??Arjun! I am the knower of all the spheres.?? Thereafter Lord Krishn
ÙeLee meJe&ieleb meew#cÙeeoekeâeMeb veesheefuehÙeles~
meJe&$eeJeefmLelees osns leLeelcee veesheefuehÙeles~~32~~ÙeLee ØekeâeMeÙelÙeskeâ: ke=âlmveb ueeskeâefceceb jefJe:~
#es$eb #es$eer leLee ke=âlmveb ØekeâeMeÙeefle Yeejle~~33~~
#es$e#es$e%eÙeesjsJecevlejb     %eeveÛe#eg<ee~YetleØeke=âeflecees#eb Ûe Ùes efJeogÙee&efvle les hejced~~34~~ yathÂ sarvagataØ saukîmyÂdÂkÂïaØ nopalipyate |sarvatrÂvasthito dehe tathÂtmÂ nopalipyate ||32||yathÂ prakÂïayatyekaÉ kçtsnaØ lokamimaØ raviÉ |
kîetraØ kîetrÍ tathÂ kçtsnaØ prakÂïayati bhÂrata ||33||
kîetrakîetrajáayorevamantaraØ jáÂnacakîuîÂ |bhötaprakçtimokîaØ ca ye viduryÂnti te param ||34||

Yatharth Geeta 344
compared Himself with other sages. It is evident from this that Lord
Krishn was also a Yogi because He who is the knower, is the knower ofthe field (kshetragya). This is how the sages have said so. ??He too is a
kshetragya.?? It means he is like other sages.
He has thrown light on the nature of the kshetra (field) as it is and
with its known disorders. Thereafter he made clear the effectiveness of
kshetragya or knower of the kshetra. Lord Krishn says that it is not healone who says so; other sages (Maharshi) have also said the same.Even the verses of the Ved also show the same. Brahmsutr also contains
the same.
Is the body, the kshetr, only so much as we see of it? Recounting
its main components, Lord Krishn has said that it is the sum of primal
nature with its eight parts, the unmanifest nature, the ten sense-organsand mind, the five objects of senses, desire, greed and passion. Solong as these components survive, the body must also be in someform or the other. This is the field on which the sown seeds, whether
good or bad, grow as sanskar. The one who voyages successfully
across this sphere is a kshetragya. Possessed of divine moral virtue,he is the one who determines the operations of kshetr.
He further said that the direct perception of the Supreme Spirit is
real knowledge after final attainment of ultimate bliss. Knowledge impliesthe  direct perception or Self Realization. Everything else is ignorance.
The Supreme Being alone is to be known or realized. He is beyond
reality and unreality. In order to know him people meditate in the spiritualheart, not by placing any idol outside. Some persons adopt theinstructions of Sankhy Yog, while others prefer the Yog of SelflessAction. They devote themselves by performing the ordained action andpracticing it with total surrender. They who do not know the proper
prescribed method, start practicing after hearing it from some self-
realized sage. They also attain the ultimate bliss. In case of anyconfusion, one must approach totally accomplished sages for spiritualdiscourses.

Chapter 13 345
Explaining the trait of a self-realized sage Yogeshwar Krishn says
that he is as non-involved as the sky despite its vast and equanimous
extensiveness. He is detached like the sun while spreading it's light
everywhere. Exactly in the same way, the self-realized sage, capable
of perceiving the presence of the all-pervading Supreme Being is notinvolved with sphere or nature. At last he finally declared that theknowledge of Kshetr (field) and the Kshetragya (knower of the field) canbe attained only by possessing the celestial eyes of Spiritual Wisdom.This Spiritual Knowledge is the outcome of the direct perception of
God. It cannot be attained by mere memorizing and repeating the
scriptures. It can be attained by properly understanding the ordainedaction from any accomplished sage, by duly performing it and restrainingthe senses along with the mind. The attainment of the spiritual experiencewhich ensues from this restraint at the time of its dissolution andperception of the Supreme Being is real knowledge. So the act or actionis important.
The present chapter is thus mainly devoted to a detailed
elaboration of kshetragya. The scope of kshetr is indeed wide andextensive. To speak the word ?body? is so easy but what vastness iscontained within this simple expression? It is coextensive with the primalnature of the entire universe. It is coextensive with endless space. It isthus the animating principle of life and no being can exist without it.
This whole universe, this world, these countries and provinces, and
this apparent human body are not even a fraction of that nature. Thus,besides kshetragya, the chapter also dwells at length on kshetr.
Thus concludes the Thirteenth Chapter, in the Upanishad of the
Shreemadbhagwadgeeta, on the Knowledge of the Supreme
Spirit, the Science of Yog, and the Dialogue between
Lord Krishn and Arjun, entitled:
?Kshetr-Kshetragya Vibhag Yog?? or
??The Sphere of Action and its Knower??.

Yatharth Geeta 346
Thus concludes the Most Revered Paramhans Paramanand Ji?s
disciple Swami Adgadanand?s exposition of the Thirteenth
Chapter of the Shreemadbhagwadgeeta in ??Yatharth Geeta??,
entitled: ?Kshetr-Kshetragya Vibhag Yog??.
HARI OM TAT SAT

Chapter 14 347
CHAPTER 14
DIVISION OF
THE THREE  PROPERTIES
Yogeshwar Krishn has elucidated the nature of knowledge in
several foregoing chapters. In the nineteenth verse of Chapter 4 he
said that the ordained action, commenced well by a worshiper, growsby gradual steps and becomes so subtle that all desires and will aredestroyed, and what he knows then by intuitive perception is knowledge.In Chapter 13 knowledge was defined as apprehension of the SupremeSpirit who is the end of the quest for truth. Knowledge makes its adventonly after the distinction between kshetr and kshetragya, matter andspirit, is comprehended. Knowledge is not logical arguments and neitheris it just the memorizing of holy texts. That state of practice is knowledgein which there is awareness of truth. The experience that is had withdirect perception of God is knowledge, and whatever is opposed to it isignorance.
Even after having dwelt upon all this, however, Lord Krishn tells
Arjun in the present chapter that he will again explain that sublimeknowledge to him. He is going to repeat what he has already said. Asper Tulsidas, scripture should be revised again and again(Ramcharitmanas, 3/36/8). This is so because, as it has been rightlysaid, we should time and again turn to even well-studied scriptures.Moreover, the further a worshiper proceeds on the path of spiritual questthe nearer he goes to the desired goal and has new experiences ofGod. This awareness is made possible by an accomplished teacherthat is, a realized sage who has attained to the Supreme Spirit and whostands  inseparably with the worshiper?s Self. It is for this reason thatLord Krishn is resolved to enlighten Arjun again on the nature of trueknowledge.

Yatharth Geeta 348
ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
hejb YetÙe: ØeJe#Ùeeefce %eeveeveeb %eevecegòececed~Ùep%eelJee cegveÙe: meJex hejeb efmeefæefcelees ielee:~~1~~Fob %eevecegheeefßelÙe cece meeOecÙe&ceeielee:~meiexÓefhe veeshepeeÙevles ØeueÙes ve JÙeLeefvle Ûe~~2~~Memory is a film on which impressions and influences are
constantly recorded. If the awareness that takes one to the supreme
goal is blurred, nature which is the cause of grief begins to be imprintedon the slate of memory. So the worshiper should constantly revise theknowledge pertaining to realization of the final goal right till the momentof attainment. Memory is alive and strong today, but the same mightnot be the case with progress to further stages. It is for this reason thatthe Revered Maharaj Ji used to say, ?Tell your beads at least onceeveryday to refresh your awareness of God. But these beads are told inthought rather than externally by audible voice.??
This is recommended for the seeker, but they who are
accomplished teacher-preceptors are constantly after the seeker toacquaint him with novel situations by arising from his Soul as well asby the example of their own conduct. Yogeshwar Krishn was such ateacher-sage. Arjun who occupies the position of his pupil has beseechedhim to support him. So Yogeshwar Krishn says that he will tell himagain of the knowledge which is the most sublime of all knowledge.
1. ?The Lord said to Arjun, ?I shall tell you again that supreme
knowledge which is the noblest of all knowledge and, having
possessed which sages have escaped from worldly bondageto achieve the ultimate perfection.???
This is the knowledge after acquiring which nothing else remains
to be sought for.2. ?They who have achieved my state by seeking shelter in this
knowledge are neither born at the beginning of creation nor
alarmed in the event of doom.?
They who are close to this knowledge and have taken refuge in it
by attaining to Lord Krishn?s state through treading the path of action
ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-
paraØ bhöyaÉ pravakîyÂmi jáÂnÂnÂØ jáÂnamuttamam |yajjáÂtva munayaÉ sarve parÂØ siddhimito gatÂÉ ||1||idaØ jáÂnamupÂïritya mama sÂdharmyamÂgatÂÉ |sarge'pi nopajÂyante pralaye na vyathanti ca ||2||

Chapter 14 349
cece Ùeesefvece&noddyeÇÿe leefmcevieYeË oOeecÙenced~
mecYeJe: meJe&Yetleeveeb lelees YeJeefle Yeejle~~3~~
meJe&Ùeesefve<eg keâewvlesÙe cetle&Ùe: mecYeJeefvle Ùee:~leemeeb yeÇÿe cenÅeesefvejnb yeerpeØeo: efhelee~~4~~
meòJeb jpemlece Fefle iegCee: Øeke=âeflemecYeJee:~
efveyeOveefvle ceneyeenes osns osefnveceJÙeÙeced~~5~~le$e meòJeb efvece&uelJeelØekeâeMekeâceveeceÙeced~
megKemeÁsve yeOveeefle %eevemeÁsve ÛeeveIe~~6~~are neither born nor frightened by the prospect of death, because the
physical entity of the sage ceases to be at the very moment when heattains to the state of the Supreme Spirit. His body is henceforth amere dwelling. Now which is that point up to which men are reborn?This is the question Lord Krishn next takes up.
3. ?Like the great Creator, O Bharat, is my eight-propertied
primal nature, the womb of which I fertilize with the seed of
consciousness by which all beings are shaped.??
Lord Krishn?s eight-part primal nature, is the womb of all being in
which he sows the seed of consciousness, and all beings are born from
this union of the insensate and the conscious.
4. ?The eightfold nature, O son of Kunti, is the mother that bears
all the beings of different births and I am the father that casts
the seed.??
There is no other mother except this primal nature, and no other
father except Lord Krishn. No matter who the root is, there will be births
so long as there is meeting of the insensate and the conscious. Butwhy is the conscious Self bound to insensible nature?
5. ?The three nature-born properties (sattwa, rajas, and tamas),
O the mighty-armed, bind the imperishable Self to the body.??The following verse throws light upon how this is affected.
6. ?Of the three properties, O the sinless, the purifying and
enlightening sattwa binds one to the desire for joy and
knowledge.??
mama yonirmahadbrahma tasmingarbhaØ dadhÂmyaham |
sambhavaÉ sarvabhötÂnÂØ tato bhavati bhÂrata ||3||
sarvayoniîu kaunteya mörtayaÉ sambhavanti yÂÉ |tÂsÂØ brahma mahadyonirahaØ bÍjapradaÉ pitÂ ||4||
sattvaØ rajastama iti guàÂÉ prakçtisambhavÂÉ |
nibadhnanti mahÂbÂho dehe dehinamavyayam ||5||tatra sattvaØ nirmalatvÂtprakÂïakamanÂmayam |
sukhasaßgena badhnÂti jáÂnasaßgena cÂnagha ||6||

Yatharth Geeta 350
jpees jeieelcekebâ efJeefæ le=<CeemeÁmecegÆJeced~
leefVeyeOveeefle keâewvlesÙe keâce&meÁsve osefnveced~~7~~
lecemlJe%eevepeb efJeefæ ceesnveb meJe&osefnveeced~
ØeceeoeuemÙeefveõeefYemleefVeyeOveeefle Yeejle~~8~~meòJeb megKes meÀeÙeefle jpe: keâce&efCe Yeejle~
%eeveceeJe=lÙe leg lece: Øeceeos meÀeÙelÙegle~~9~~The virtuous property binds the Self to the body with attachment
to joy and knowledge. So sattwa, too, is a bondage. As we have already
seen, happiness lies in God, and the intuitive perception of that SupremeSpirit is knowledge. The man who is endowed with the property of sattwais bound only so long as he does not apprehend God.
7. ?Know, O son of Kunti, that the property of rajas, born from
desire and infatuation, binds the Self with attachment to action
and its fruits. Rajas, an embodiment of passion, inclines oneto action.??
8. ?And, O Bharat, know that the property of tamas, which
deludes all beings, arises from ignorance and binds the Soulwith carelessness, sloth, and slumber.??
Tamas binds the Self with laziness, the tendency to put off a
task to the next day, and with sleep. ?Sleep? here does not mean that a
man possessed of tamas sleeps too much. It is not a question of thebody sleeping at all. As Lord Krishn said in the sixty-ninth verse ofChapter 2, the world itself with its ephemeral pleasures is like night inwhich the man endowed with the property of tamas ever toils in a stateof unconsciousness of the effulgent God. This is the slumber of tamasand one who is trapped in it sleeps. Lord Krishn now discourses on thecollective form of the three properties.
9. ?Whereas the property of sattwa motivates one to joy, rajas
prompts to action, and tamas veils knowledge and drives
one to carelessness.??
While sattwa leads one to ultimate bliss and rajas to action, tamas
tempts the mind and heart to futile endeavours. However, when the
rajo rÂgÂtmakaØ viddhi tçîàÂsaßgasamudbhavam |
tannibadhnÂti kaunteya karmasaßgena dehinam ||7||
tamastvajáÂnajaØ viddhi mohanaØ sarvadehinÂm |
pramÂdÂlasyanidrÂbhistannibadhnÂti bhÂrata ||8||sattvaØ sukhe saájayati rajaÉ karmaài bhÂrata |
jáÂnamÂvçtya tu tamaÉ pramÂde saájayatyuta ||9||

Chapter 14 351
jpemlece§eeefYeYetÙe meòJeb YeJeefle Yeejle~
jpe: meòJeb lece§ewJe lece: meòJeb jpemleLee~~10~~
meJe&Éejs<eg  osnsÓefmcevØekeâeMe  GhepeeÙeles~%eeveb Ùeoe leoe efJeÅeeefÉJe=æb meòJeefcelÙegle~~11~~
ueesYe: ØeJe=efòejejcYe: keâce&CeeceMece: mhe=ne~
jpemÙesleeefve peeÙevles efJeJe=æs Yejle<e&Ye~~12~~DeØekeâeMeesÓØeJe=efòe§e Øeceeoes ceesn SJe Ûe~
lecemÙesleeefve peeÙevles efJeJe=æs kegâ®vevove~~13~~properties are confined to one place and to one heart, how are they
divided from each other? According to Lord Krishn:
10. ?And, O Bharat, just as sattwa grows by overcoming the
properties of rajas and tamas, tamas grows by overpowering
rajas and sattwa, and the property of rajas grows bysuppressing tamas and sattwa.?
But how should we know which property is dominant at a certain
time?11. ??When the body along with mind and senses are suffused
with the light of knowledge and consciousness, it should be
taken as a sign of the growing strength of sattwa.??
And-
12. ?When the property of rajas is ascendant, O the best of Bharat,
greed, worldly inclination, the tendency to undertake action,
restlessness, and desire for sensual pleasures arise.??
What happens, however, when tamas grows dominant?
13. ?When there is an upsurge of tamas, O Kurunandan, darkness,
disinclination to duty which ought to be done, carelessness,
and tendencies that engender infatuation arise.??
As tamas multiplies, there ensue the haze of ignorance (light is a
symbol of God), a natural reluctance to advance towards the divine
radiance, disinclination to the special ordained action, futile efforts ofthe mind and heart, and propensities which tempt one to the world.
rajastamaïcÂbhibhöya sattvaØ bhavati bhÂrata |
rajaÉ sattvaØ tamaïcaiva tamaÉ sattvaØ rajastathÂ ||10||
sarvadvÂreîu dehe'sminprakÂïa upajÂyate |jáÂnaØ yadÂ tadÂ vidyÂdvivçddhaØ sattvamityuta ||11||
lobhaÉ pravçttirÂrambhaÉ karmaàÂmaïamaÉ spçhÂ |
rajasyetÂni jÂyante vivçddhe bharatarîabha ||12||aprakÂïo'pravçttiïca pramÂdo moha eva ca |
tamasyetÂni jÂyante vivçddhe kurunandana ||13||

Yatharth Geeta 352
Ùeoe meòJes ØeJe=æs leg ØeueÙeb Ùeeefle osnYe=led~
leoesòeceefJeoeb ueeskeâeveceueevØeefleheÅeles~~14~~
jpeefme ØeueÙeb ielJee keâce&meefÁ<eg peeÙeles~
leLee Øeueervemleceefme cet{Ùeesefve<eg peeÙeles~~15~~keâce&Ce: megke=âlemÙeeng: meeefòJekebâ efvece&ueb Heâueced~
jpememleg Heâueb og:Kece%eeveb leceme: Heâueced~~16
meòJeelmeÀeeÙeles %eeveb jpemees ueesYe SJe Ûe~Øeceeoceesnew lecemees YeJeleesÓ%eevecesJe Ûe~~17~~What, however, is the profit of knowing the properties?
14. ?If the Soul departs when the property of sattwa is dominant,
it attains to the pure worlds of the virtuous.??
And-
15. ?If he meets with death when rajas is presiding, he is born as
one of  humans who are attached to action; and he is born in
the form of unintelligent beings if he leaves the body whentamas is prevailing.??
So of all properties man should be endowed with sattwa. The
bank of nature refunds the earned merits even after death. Now let us
see its consequence.
16. ?While righteousness is said to be the pure outcome of action
that is governed by sattwa, the outcome of rajas is sorrow,
and the outcome of tamas is ignorance.??
Absolute happiness, knowledge, renunciation, and such other
qualities are said to be the outcome of action inspired by sattwa. On
the other hand, sorrow is the outcome of action characterized by rajas,and ignorance of action dominated by tamas.
17. ?Knowledge arises from the property of sattwa, greed beyond
any doubt from rajas, and carelessness, delusion, and
ignorance from tamas.??
What mode of existence does the generation of these properties
result into?
yadÂ sattve pravçddhe tu pralayaØ yÂti dehabhçt |
tadottamavidÂØ lokÂnamalÂnpratipadyate ||14||
rajasi pralayaØ gatvÂ karmasaßgiîu jÂyate |
tathÂ pralÍnastamasi möÅhayoniîu jÂyate ||15||karmaàaÉ sukçtasyÂhuÉ sÂttvikaØ nirmalaØ phalam |
rajasastu phalaØ duÉkhamajáÂnaØ tamasaÉ phalam ||16||
sattvÂtsaájÂyate jáÂnaØ rajaso lobha eva ca |pramÂdamohau tamaso bhavato'jáÂnameva ca ||17||

Chapter 14 353
TOJeË ieÛÚefvle meòJemLee ceOÙes efle?efvle jepemee:~
peIevÙeiegCeJe=efòemLee DeOees ieÛÚefvle leecemee:~~18~~veevÙeb iegCesYÙe: keâlee&jb Ùeoe õ°evegheMÙeefle~
iegCesYÙe§e hejb Jesefòe ceÆeJeb meesÓefOeieÛÚefle~~19~~
iegCeevesleeveleerlÙe $eervosner osnmecegÆJeeved~pevcece=lÙegpejeog:Kewe|JecegòeâesÓce=leceMvegles~~20~~18. ?Whereas they who dwell in sattwa ascend to higher worlds,
they who sojourn in rajas remain in the middle (the world of
men), and they who abide in the meanest of properties tamas
are doomed to the lowest state.??
The current of life that is founded on sattwa flows towards the
transcendental, primal God and the man with such a life attains to purer
worlds. Souls who are dominated by rajas end up as common mortals.Lacking in discernment and renunciation, although they do not
transmigrate into lower forms of life, they have to undergo rebirth. Ignorant
and immoral men who are ruled by the rightly maligned tamas are rebornin the lowest forms. Thus the consequence of all the three properties is
some kind of birth or the other. Only they who go beyond these properties
are freed from the shackle of rebirth and they alone realize Lord Krishn?ssublime state.
19. ?When the Soul (that is a mere witness) does not see anyone
besides the three properties as doer and when he knows the
essence of the Supreme Spirit who is beyond these properties,
he attains to my state.??
The assumption that the three properties only duplicate themselves
is not based on true knowledge. The process of accomplishment at last
leads to the state in which after the perception of God no other agent
except the three properties is visible, and in such a state a man goesbeyond them. What Lord Krishn has to say about this next is a proof
that this is not just a flight of fancy.
20. ?Transcending the properties that are the germ of  the gross,
corporal body and liberated from the miseries of birth, death,
and old age, the Soul achieves the ultimate bliss.??
ördhvaØ gacchanti sattvasthÂ madhye tiîòhanti rÂjasÂÉ |
jaghanyaguàavçttisthÂ adho gacchanti tÂmasÂÉ ||18||nÂnyaØ guàebhyaÉ kartÂraØ yadÂ draîòÂnupaïyati |
guàebhyaïca paraØ vetti madbhÂvaØ so'dhigacchati ||19||
guàÂnetÂnatÍtya trÍndehÍ dehasamudbhavÂn |janmamçtyujarÂduÉkhairvimukto'mçtamaïnute ||20||

Yatharth Geeta 354
Depeg&ve GJeeÛe-
kewâe|ueÁw?eerviegCeevesleeveleerlees YeJeefle ØeYees~
efkeâceeÛeej: keâLeb Ûewleeb?eerviegCeeveefleJele&les~~21~~ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
ØekeâeMeb Ûe ØeJe=efòeb Ûe ceesncesJe Ûe heeC[Je~
ve Ésef° mecØeJe=òeeefve ve efveJe=òeeefve keâe*d#eefle~~22GoemeerveJeoemeervees iegCewÙeex ve efJeÛeeuÙeles~
iegCee Jele&vle FlÙesJe ÙeesÓJeefle?efle vesÁles~~23~~
meceog:KemegKe: mJemLe: meceuees°eMcekeâeÃeve:~leguÙeefØeÙeeefØeÙees OeerjmleguÙeefvevoelcemebmlegefle:~~24After a man is liberated from the three properties, his Soul tastes
the nectar of immortality. Thereupon Arjun puts another question to
Lord Krishn.
21. ?Arjun said, ?Tell me, O Lord, the attributes of the man who
has risen above the three properties, his manner of life, and
the way by which he transcends the three properties.???
The following verses contain Lord Krishn?s reply to the three
questions raised by Arjun.22. ??The Lord said, ?The man, O Pandav, who neither abhors
radiance, inclination to action, and attachment that are
generated respectively by the operations of sattwa, rajas, andtamas when he is involved in them, nor aspires for themwhen he is liberated;...??
23. ?And who, like a dispassionate onlooker, is unmoved by the
properties and is steady and unshaken by dint of hisrealization that these properties of nature but abide inthemselves;...??
24. ?And who, ever dwelling in his Self, views joy, sorrow, earth,
stone, and gold as equal, is patient, and evenly regards thepleasant and the unpleasant, slander and praise;...??
arjuna uvÂca-
kairlißgaistrÍnguàÂnetÂnatÍto bhavati prabho |
kimÂcÂraÉ kathaØ caitÂØstrÍnguàÂnativartate ||21||ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-
prakÂïaØ ca pravçttiØ ca mohameva ca pÂàÅava |
na dveîòi sampravçttÂni na nivçttÂni kÂßkîati ||22||udÂsÍnavadÂsÍno guàairyo na vicÂlyate |
guàÂ vartanta ityeva yo'vatiîòhati neßgate ||23||
samaduÉkhasukhaÉ svasthaÉ samaloîòÂïmakÂácanaÉ |
tulyapriyÂpriyo dhÍrastulyanindÂtmasaØstutiÉ ||24||

Chapter 14 355
25. ?And who puts up with honour and dishonour, as (also) with
friend and foe, with equanimity, and who gives up the
undertaking of action is said to have transcended all theproperties.??
Verses twenty-second to twenty-fifth disclose the attributes of
the man who has risen above the three properties so that he is
unagitated, unswayed by the properties, and steady. What follows nowis clarification of the means by which one is liberated from theseproperties.
26. ?And the man who serves me with the yog of unswerving
devotion overcomes the three properties and secures the state
of oneness with God.??
One who worships Lord Krishn with unwavering dedication, that
is, with only the adored goal in his mind and oblivious of all other worldly
memories, constantly serves him by performing the ordained action,goes well across the three properties and is worthy of being one withthe Supreme Spirit. This union with God is the true kalp or cure. No onecan go beyond these properties without undertaking the prescribed taskwith perfect intentness. So the Yogeshwar at last gives his judgement.
27. ?For I am the one in which the eternal God, immortal life, the
imperishable dharm, and the ultimate bliss all abide.??Lord Krishn is the dwelling of immortal God (through a single-
minded access to whom the seeker is cured of all worldly maladies), of
everlasting life, of eternal Dharm, and of the unblemished pure joy ofattaining to the Supreme Goal. In other words, a God-oriented saint isthe abode of all this bliss. Such a sage was Lord Krishn-a yogi.
ceeveeheceeveÙeesmleguÙemleguÙees efce$eeefjhe#eÙees:~
meJee&jcYeheefjlÙeeieer iegCeeleerle: me GÛÙeles~~25~~ceeb Ûe ÙeesÓJÙeefYeÛeejsCe YeefòeâÙeesiesve mesJeles~
me iegCeevmeceleerlÙewleevyeÇÿeYetÙeeÙe keâuheles~~26~~
yeÇÿeCees  efn  Øeefle?encece=lemÙeeJÙeÙemÙe  Ûe~MeeÕelemÙe Ûe Oece&mÙe megKemÙewkeâeefvlekeâmÙe Ûe~~27
mÂnÂpamÂnayostulyastulyo mitrÂripakîayoÉ |sarvÂrambhaparityÂgÍ guàÂtÍtaÉ sa ucyate ||25||mÂØ ca yo'vyabhicÂreàa bhaktiyogena sevate |
sa guàÂnsamatÍtyaitÂnbrahmabhöyÂya kalpate ||26||
brahmaào hi pratiîòhÂhamamçitasyÂvyayasya ca |ïaïvatasya ca dharmasya sukhasyaikÂntikasya ca ||27||

Yatharth Geeta 356
So if we are seeking for the ineffable, indestructible God, the
eternal dharm, and the pure, ultimate bliss, we have to take refuge in
some great Soul that dwells in the incommunicable essence. Only sucha sage can enable a devotee to achieve what he is questing for.
???????????????
Yogeshwar Krishn has told Arjun at the beginning of this chapter
that he will again acquaint him with that knowledge which is the mostsublime of all knowledge and after knowing which sages achieve identitywith him and do not have to undergo rebirth at the outset of creation.They are also not grieved over the inevitable demise of the body. They,in fact, discard the body on the very day on which they achieve Self-Realization. Accomplishment is made in the course of physical life, buteven the prospect of death does not affect them.
Dwelling upon the nature of that from which they are liberated,
Lord Krishn has pointed out that the eightfold primal nature is the motherwho conceives, whereas he is the life-giving father; besides them thereis no other mother or father. Although there may well appear somemother and father so long as the relationship of nature (prakriti) andSoul (purush), of passive matter and the active male principle, lasts, intruth nature is mother and Lord Krishn is father.
The nature-borne properties of sattwa, rajas, and tamas bind the
Soul to the body. One of these properties grows by suppressing theother two. These properties are changeable. Nature is without end andcannot be destroyed, but the consequences of its properties can beavoided. These properties influence the mind. When sattwa is plentiful,the consequence is divine effulgence and the power of perception. Rajas,characterized by passion, results in temptation to action and ininfatuation. If tamas is active, sloth and carelessness  predominate. Ifa man meets with death when sattwa is predominant, he is born inhigher and purer worlds. The man who departs from this life when rajasis plentiful returns to be born again in the human form. When a mandies under the sway of tamas, he is condemned to lower births. So it is

Chapter 14 357
vital that men ought always to move in the direction of gradual
advancement of the property of sattwa. The three properties are thereal cause of some birth or the other. Since it is these properties whichchain the Soul to the body, one should constantly endeavour to gobeyond them.
At this Arjun asks three questions. What are the features of the
man who has risen above the properties of nature? How does he conducthimself? And what is the way of transcending the three properties?Replying to the queries, after elaborating the attributes and mode ofaction of the man who has liberated himself from these properties,Yogeshwar Krishn points out that he who remembers Me with unflinchingdevotion, thus adopting the yogic way, rises above the approach of thethree properties. The unflinching devotion means devotion to andcontemplation of the adored God unceasingly. And yog implies remainingtotally untouched or uninfluenced by the pleasures and pains of worldlyunion and disunion. The method of putting it into practice is known askarm or action. That act which leads to the culmination of yagya iskarm or action. Through undaunted devotion and the practice of theordained action (Niyat Karm) alone a devotee goes beyond the grip ofthe three properties and then becomes one with Brahm (the SupremeBeing). He becomes eligible for the ultimate transformation. With thedissolution of the mind, which tends to fall under the influence of theproperties, the total identification with Brahm occurs. This is what maybe called the actual  'Kalp' or complete transformation. No one can gobeyond the properties without spiritual practice.
At last, Lord Krishn declares that he alone is the dwelling of the
unblemished pure joy of attaining to Supreme goal; of the immortal Godwith which the devotee is unified after getting liberated from theproperties; of the immortal Essence and of the eternal Dharm. In otherwords, he says that he is the main doer. Now a doubt may crop up thatLord Krishn is no longer here and hence the shelter does not exist anymore. Where may one find the same? The doubt is meaningless becauseLord Krishn has introduced himself that he was a Yogi, an accomplished

Yatharth Geeta 358
sage, who had attained the ultimate bliss. Submitting to him Arjun said-
"I am your disciple, have taken refuge in you, tell me the means thatwill definitely be the most conducive to what is supremely propitiousand save me." At different places Lord Krishn has introduced himselfand narrated the traits of a steadfast totally enlightened sage who hasattained the equipoise and compared them with himself. So, it can befinally concluded that Lord Krishn was an exalted sage, and anaccomplished Yogi. Now If you desire indivisible, eternal bliss or theeternal Dharm or the immortal Essence, then it should be crystal clearthat the source of attaining all this is only an enlightened sage, theSadguru. Merely by reading books, no one can attain it. When the samenoble sage (Sadguru) starts guiding you, sitting as a charioteer, hebecomes one with your soul and initiates - directing step by step till thedevotee attains his Self, where he himself is already established. Thus,such a sage is the only means.
Thus revealing himself as the shelter of all, Yogeshwar Krishn
concludes Chapter 14 with a detailed account of the three properties ofnature.
Thus concludes the Fourteenth Chapter, in the Upanishad of the
Shreemadbhagwadgeeta, on the Knowledge of the Supreme
Spirit, the Discipline of Yog, and the Dialogue between
Lord Krishn and Arjun, entitled:
?Guntray Vibhag Yog?
or
??Division of the Three Properties??.
Thus concludes the Most Revered Paramhans Paramanand Ji?s
disciple Swami Adgadanand?s exposition of the Fourteenth
Chapter of the Shreemadbhagwadgeeta in ??Yatharth Geeta??,
entitled: ?Guntray Vibhag Yog?.
HARI OM TAT SAT

Chapter 15 359
CHAPTER 15
THE YOG
OF THE SUPREME BEING
Accomplished sages have striven to explain the nature of the
world by various analogies. While some have described it as the forest
of worldly life, others have represented it as the ocean of mortalexistence. In a different context the same has been called the river orabyss of worldly life. Sometimes it has also been compared to theimpression of the hoof of a cow. Apparently they all imply that theextension of the world is only so much as that of the senses. And thestage at last comes when even this fearsome ?ocean? dries up. In thewords of Goswami Tulsidas, the mere intoning of God dries up thisocean. Yogeshwar Krishn, too, has used ?ocean? and ?tree? as epithetsfor the world. He has said in the sixth and seventh verses of Chapter 12that he soon delivers his loving devotees, who contemplate him-themanifest God-with firm concentration, from the gulf of the mortal world.In the present chapter he declares that the world is a tree which yogiwho are seeking for the supreme goal have to cut down.
1. ??The Lord said, ?He who knows the Peepal tree that the world
is, with its roots above and branches below and which is
said to be imperishable, and of which Vedic verses are thefoliage, is a knower of the Ved.???
The root of this everlasting Peepal tree-like world is the God above
and its boughs are the nature below. A tree does not even last till the
symbolic tomorrow, but the tree of the world is indestructible. Two thingsare immortal according to Lord Krishn. The first of these is the everlasting
ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
TOJe&cetueceOe:MeeKeceÕelLeb  ØeengjJÙeÙeced~
Úvoebefme ÙemÙe heCee&efve Ùemleb Jeso me JesoefJeled~~1~~ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-
ördhvamölamadhaÉïÂkhamaïvatthaØ prÂhuravyayam |
chandÂØsi yasya paràÂni yastaØ veda sa vedavit ||1||

Yatharth Geeta 360
DeOe§eesOJeË Øeme=leemlemÙe MeeKee
iegCeØeJe=æe efJe<eÙeØeJeeuee:~
DeOe§e     cetueevÙevegmevleleeefvekeâcee&vegyevOeerefve ceveg<Ùeueeskesâ~~2~~world and then beyond it there is the eternal Supreme Spirit. The Ved
are said to be the leaves of this tree of the world. The man who observesthis tree well along with its root and is aware of its reality is an adept inthe knowledge of Ved.
The man who has perceived the truth of the world-tree rather than
one who has merely perused holy books, is a true knower of the Ved.Study of books only provides a motive for proceeding in that direction.It may well be asked at this point why the Ved are needed instead ofleaves. Vedic verses, which generate well-being, are useful becausethey motivate from the very point when after a great deal of wanderingabout a Soul goes through his last birth which is like the final shoot of atree. This is the turning point where the straying ceases and the seekerbegins to proceed confidently towards God.
2. ??Its branches nourished by the three properties extend high
and low, objects of the senses are its shoots, and its action-
engendering roots stretch below to the world of men.??
The boughs of sense-objects and their enjoyment, nourished and
cultivated by the three properties, of the tree-like world spread everywhere
above and below, even going back into the earth and sprouting newshoots. They extend from the worms and insects below to the godlystate and Creator above, but they can bind only those who are born asmen according to their past actions. All other births are only for theenjoyment of sense-objects; only human birth is subject to bondage inkeeping with action. And-
adhaïcordhvaØ prasçtÂstasya ïÂkhÂ
guàapravçddhÂ viîayapravÂlÂÉ |
adhaïca mölÂnyanusantatÂnikarmÂnubandhÍni manuîyaloke ||2||

Chapter 15 361
3. ?Since its form is not to be seen here as such and it has
neither an end nor a beginning, nor a secure foundation, this
immensely-grown tree should be cut down with the axe ofrenunciation.?
The world-tree does not have a firm existence because it is
changeable. So it has to be felled with the axe of total abandonment. It
has to be cut down, not worshiped as it usually is because of thesuperstitious assumption that God resides in the roots of this tree andthat its leaves are the Ved.
However, since this tree has grown from God?s own seed, can it
be cut down? In fact, the meaning of this cutting down is escape fromnature which is accomplished by renunciation. But what is to be doneafter the tree has been cut down?
4. ?Then that goal should be sought for, after arriving at which
one does not have to turn back again, with a sense of total
submission to that primal God whence all worldly life is born.?
But how to affect the quest for this God? The Yogeshwar lays
down that self-surrender is an essential condition for it. There should be
the feeling that ?I am at the mercy of God?-the Infinite Being from whomthe primordial world-tree has sprouted and grown. This tree cannot becut down without seeking shelter under him. Lord Krishn then speaksabout the signs from which one may realize that the tree has been cutdown.
ve ¤hecemÙesn leLeesheueYÙeles
veevlees ve Ûeeefove& Ûe mecØeefle?e~
DeÕelLecesveb   megefJe¤{cetue-cemeÁMe?esCe  Â{sve  efÚòJee~~3~~
lele: heob lelheefjceeefie&leJÙeb
Ùeefmcevielee ve efveJele&efvle YetÙe:~lecesJe ÛeeÅeb  heg®<eb ØeheÅes
Ùele: ØeJe=efòe: Øeme=lee hegjeCeer~~4~~
na röpamasyeha tathopalabhyate
nÂnto na cÂdirna ca sampratiîòhÂ |
aïvatthamenaØ suviröÅhamöla-masaßgaïastreàa dçÅhena chittvÂ ||3||
tataÉ padaØ tatparimÂrgitavyaØ
yasmingatÂ na nivartanti bhöyaÉ |tameva cÂdyaØ puruîaØ prapadye
yataÉ pravçttiÉ prasçtÂ purÂàÍ ||4||

Yatharth Geeta 362
efvecee&veceesne   efpelemeÁoes<ee
DeOÙeelceefvelÙee efJeefveJe=òekeâecee:~
ÉvÉwefJe&cegòeâe: megKeog:Keme_%ew-
ie&ÛÚvlÙecet{e: heoceJÙeÙeb leled~~5~~ve leÆemeÙeles metÙeex ve MeMee¿es ve heeJekeâ:~
ÙeûlJee  ve  efveJele&vles  leæece  hejceb  cece~~6~~
cecewJeebMees peerJeueeskesâ peerJeYetle: meveeleve:~ceve:<e?eveerefvõÙeeefCe Øeke=âeflemLeeefve keâ<e&efle~~7~~
Mejerjb ÙeoJeehveesefle ÙeÛÛeehÙegl?eâeceleerÕej:~
ie=nerlJewleeefve mebÙeeefle JeeÙegie&vOeeefveJeeMeÙeeled~~8~~5. ?Men of knowledge who are free from vanity and delusion,
victorious against the evil of infatuation, ever-abiding in the
Supreme Spirit, totally devoid of desire, and liberated fromthe contradictions of joy and grief, achieve the eternal goal.??
The destruction of vanity, delusion, infatuation, desire and of the
contradictions of pleasure and pain is possible only by complete self-
surrender to and abiding constantly in God. Only through this do men oftrue wisdom attain to the eternal state. The world-tree cannot be severedwithout this attainment and renunciation is needed up to this point. Nowwhat is the form of that ultimate state which is achieved by renunciation?
6. ?That after reaching which there is no return, and which is
illumined by neither the sun nor the moon, nor by fire, is my
supreme abode.??
After this ultimate home has once been reached, there is no rebirth.
And everyone has an equal right to it.7. ?The immortal Soul in the body is a part of mine and it is he
who attracts the five senses and the sixth-the mind-that dwell
in nature.??
Lord Krishn now explains how it is so:
8. ?Like the wind carrying a scent from its source, the Soul that
is lord of the body also bears along with him the senses and
the mind from its previous body and assumes a new one.?
nirmÂnamohÂ jitasaßgadoîÂ
adhyÂtmanityÂ vinivçttakÂmÂÉ |
dvandvairvimuktÂÉ sukhaduÉkhasaØjáai-
rgacchantyamöÅhÂÉ padamavyayaØ tat ||5||na tadbhÂsayate söryo na ïaïÂßko na pÂvakaÉ |
yadgatvÂ na nivartante taddhÂma paramaØ mama ||6||
mamaivÂØïo jÍvaloke jÍvabhötaÉ sanÂtanaÉ |manaÉîaîòhÂnÍndriyÂài prakçtisthÂni karîati ||7||
ïarÍraØ yadavÂpnoti yaccÂpyutkrÂmatÍïvaraÉ |
gçhÍtvaitÂni saØyÂti vÂyurgandhÂnivÂïayÂt ||8||

Chapter 15 363
ßees$eb Ûe#eg: mheMe&veb Ûe jmeveb IeÇeCecesJe Ûe~
DeefOe?eÙe   ceve§eeÙeb   efJe<eÙeeveghemesJeles~~9~~
Gl?eâecevleb efmLeleb Jeeefhe YegÀeeveb Jee iegCeeefvJeleced~efJecet{e veevegheMÙeefvle heMÙeefvle %eeveÛe#eg<e:~~10~~
Ùelevlees Ùeesefieve§ewveb heMÙevlÙeelcevÙeJeefmLeleced~
ÙelevleesÓhÙeke=âleelceevees vewveb heMÙevlÙeÛesleme:~~11~~The Soul carries with him the propensities and mode of action of
the mind and five senses of the body from which he departs and takes
them into his new body. The next body is immediately assured and thatis why Lord Krishn asked Arjun earlier how he had happened to be avictim of the misconception that the departed Souls of ancestors wouldfall from heaven in the absence of obsequial rice-cakes and water-libation offerings. However, the immediate question is what the Souldoes after going into a new body and what truly are the five sensesalong with the mind?
9. ?Governing the senses of hearing, sight, touch, taste, smell
and also the mind, he (the Soul) experiences objects through
them.??
But it is not seen to be so and everyone is not able to see it.
10. ?The ignorant are unaware of the Soul, endowed with the
three properties and departing from the body or dwelling in
it and enjoying objects; only they who have eyes of wisdomdiscern him.?
So naturally the next verse is on how to secure this vision-
11. ?Yogi know the essence of the Soul dwelling in their heart,
but the unknowing who have not purified themselves of evils
fail to see him even after much endeavour.??
By restraining their minds from all directions and through earnest
endeavour yogi perceive their Soul. But men with an unaccomplished
Soul, that is, with unclean mind and heart, fail to see him even thoughthey strive for it. This is because their mind and sense organs are
ïrotraØ cakîuÉ sparïanaØ ca rasanaØ ghrÂàameva ca |
adhiîòhÂya manasÉcÂyaØ viîayÂnupasevate ||9||
utkrÂmantaØ sthitaØ vÂpi bhuájÂnaØ vÂ guàÂnvitam |vimöÅhÂ nÂnupaïyanti païyanti jáÂnacakîuîaÉ ||10||
yatanto yoginaïcainaØ païyantyÂtmanyavasthitam |
yatanto'pyakçtÂtmÂno nainaØ païyantyacetasaÉ ||11||

Yatharth Geeta 364
ÙeoeefolÙeieleb  lespees  peieÆemeÙelesÓefKeueced~
ÙeÛÛevõceefme ÙeÛÛeeie>ew leòespees efJeefæ ceecekeâced~~12
ieeceeefJeMÙe  Ûe  Yetleeefve  OeejÙeecÙenceespemee~
heg<Ceeefce Ûeew<eOeer: meJee&: meescees YetlJee jmeelcekeâ:~~13Denb JewÕeevejes YetlJee ØeeefCeveeb osnceeefßele:~
ØeeCeeheevemeceeÙegòeâ: heÛeecÙeVeb ÛelegefJe&Oeced~~14impure. Only by making a strenuous effort to subdue their mind are
sages enabled to apprehend their Self. So contemplation is a necessity.Lord Krishn now throws light upon the glories of the Self of realizedsages, which have also been dwelt upon earlier.
12. ?Know that the radiance of the sun that lights up the world,
and of the moon and fire, is my own effulgence.?Next he points out the sage?s task:
13. ?Permeating the earth, I support all beings with my radical
energy and like the ambrosial moon, I provide the sap that
nourishes all plants.??
And-
14. ?I am the fire, possessed of pran and apan, within the body
of all living beings that consumes the food by the four modes.??In Chapter 4, Lord Krishn referred to various kinds of fire-of
knowledge (verses 19 and 37), of God (verse 25), of restraint (verse
26), of the senses (verse 26), of yog (verse 27), and of pran-apan (verses29-30); and the resultant from all of them was said to be knowledge.Knowledge itself is fire. Assuming the form of such fire, it is Lord Krishnwho accepts and assimilates the food generated by the four modes ofrecitation, namely, baikhari, madhyama, pashyanti, and para that areendowed with pran and apan (it will be remembered that recitation isalways by means of inhaled and exhaled breath).
According to Lord Krishn God is the only food-manna-with which
the Soul is so placated that it never feels any hunger again. We givethe name of food to accepted nutrients of the body. But God alone is
yadÂdityagataØ tejo jagadbhÂsayate'khilam |
yaccandramasi yaccÂgnau tattejo viddhi mÂmakam ||12||
gÂmÂviïya ca bhötÂni dhÂrayÂmyahamojasÂ |
puîàÂmi cauîadhÍÉ sarvÂÉ somo bhötvÂ rasÂtmakaÉ ||13||ahaØ vaiïvanaro bhötvÂ prÂàinÂØ dehamÂïritaÉ |
prÂàÂpÂnasamayuktaÉ pacÂmyannaØ caturvidham ||14||

Chapter 15 365
meJe&mÙe Ûeenb ùefo meefVeefJe°es
ceòe: mce=efle%ee&veceheesnveb Ûe~
Jesow§e    meJezjncesJe   JesÅees
Jesoevleke=âÉsoefJeosJe Ûeenced~~15~~the real food. And this food is brought to ripeness only by going through
the four steps of baikhari, madhyama, pashyanti, and para. Some wisemen have also called them name (nam), form (rup), revelation (leela),and abode (dham). At first the name is pronounced audibly. Then,gradually, the form of the adored God begins to take shape within theheart. Subsequently, the worshiper begins to view God?s dalliance inhis breath-how he pervades every atom of  the universe and how heoperates everywhere. Perception of the works of God within the sphereof the heart is leela. Rather than enactment of folk plays based on thelegends of Ram and Krishn, it is perception of the operations of Godwithin the realm of the heart that is the true leela. And the supremeabode is reached when the touch of God begins to be felt after theperception of his operations. Knowing him thus, the worshiper comesto dwell within him. Dwelling in this abode and dwelling in the SupremeSpirit-after feeling his touch in the perfect state of transcendentalrecitation (paravani) are simultaneous events.
Thus, equipped with pran and apan, or shwas and prashwas, and
progressing gradually through baikhari, madhyama and pashyanti tothe culminating stage of para, the food that God is, is ready and availableand also assimilated, and, of course, by then the eater of the food isready, too, to partake of the sublime nourishment.
15. ?Seated in the heart of all beings, I am their memory and
knowledge and also the strength that overcomes all
impediments; I am that which is worthy of being apprehendedby the Ved; and I verily am the author of the Vedant as wellas their knower.??
Lord Krishn exists as the omniscient presence in the heart of all
beings and it is because of him that the Supreme Spirit is remembered.
sarvasya cÂhaØ hçdi sanniviîòo
mattaÉ smçtirjáÂnamapohanaØ ca |
vedaiïca sarvairahameva vedyo
vedÂntkçdvedavideva cÂham ||15||

Yatharth Geeta 366
ÉeefJeceew heg®<eew ueeskesâ #ej§ee#ej SJe Ûe~
#ej: meJee&efCe Yetleeefve ketâ?mLeesÓ#ej GÛÙeles~~16~~
Gòece: heg®<emlJevÙe: hejceelceslÙegoeùle:~Ùees ueeskeâ$eÙeceeefJeMÙe efyeYelÙe&JÙeÙe F&Õej:~~17~~Memory here signifies the recalling of the forgotten essence of God.
There is clearly here a representation of the moment of realization.Knowledge that comes with memory and the ability to overcomedifficulties are also gifts from Lord Krishn. He is also a fit subject forknowing by all the Ved. He, too, is the author as well as end of the Ved.Knowledge comes when he is separate, but who will know whom whenthe worshiper has perceived him and become one with him? Lord Krishnis also knower of the Ved. He said at the beginning of the chapter thatthe world is a tree, of which the root is the God above and all of thebranches below are nature. The one who can distinguish the root fromthe branches that are nature knows the essence of it, and he is versedin the Ved (sacred knowledge). Here he says that he is such a one-knower of the Ved. He thus puts himself on a par with other scholars ofthe Ved. Thus it is again stressed that Lord Krishn was a sage whoknew the truth-truly a Yogeshwar among yogi. The subject is concludedhere and now he goes on to say that there are two kinds of beings(Purush).
16. ??There are two kinds of beings in the world, the mortal and
the immortal: whereas the bodies of all beings are destructible,
their Souls are said to be imperishable.?
The person male or female, who has restrained his senses along
with the mind, that is, whose body of senses is steady, is said to be
imperishable. The ??perishable?? person exists today, but may not existeven tomorrow. But this too is Soul in a particular condition. There is,however, another Self beyond these two.
17. ?But higher than both of them is the one who pervades the
three worlds to support and sustain all, and who is named
the eternal God and Supreme Spirit (Ishwar).??
dvÂvimau puruîau loke kîaraïcÂkîara eva ca |
kîaraÉ sarvÂài bhötÂni köòastho'kîara ucyate ||16||
uttamaÉ puruîastvanyaÉ paramÂtmetyudÂhçtaÉ |yo lokatrayamÂviïya bibhartyavyaya ÍïvaraÉ ||17||

Chapter 15 367
  The unmanifest God, the imperishable, and the Supreme Being
are some other names by which he is known. But truly he is different
and inexpressible. He represents the ultimate state beyond the mutableand the immutable (the perishable and the imperishable). He is directedby the Supreme Spirit, but he is different and beyond words. Lord Krishnintroduces himself as a Soul in such a state.
18. ?Since I am supreme by virtue of being beyond both the
perishable (body) and the imperishable (Soul), I am known
as the Supreme Being (Purushottam) in the world as well asin the Ved.??
He is reputed as the Supreme Being in both the world and the
Ved because he has transcended the destructible, mutable kshetr and
even gone higher than the immutable, imperishable, steady Soul.
19. ?The all-knowing man, who is thus  aware of my essence, O
Bharat, as the Supreme Being, always worships me with
perfect devotion.??
Such a worshiper is not separate from Lord Krishn.
20. ?I have thus instructed you, O the sinless, in this most subtle
of all knowledge because, O Bharat, by knowing its essence
a man gains wisdom and accomplishes all his tasks.??
Lord Krishn thus enlightens Arjun on the most secret knowledge,
by being well acquainted with the essence of which a man becomes all-
knowing and gains his object. So this instruction by Lord Krishn is acomplete sacred precept in itself.
Ùemceel#ejceleerleesÓnce#ejeoefhe  Ûeesòece:~
DeleesÓefmce ueeskesâ Jesos Ûe ØeefLele: heg®<eesòece:~~18~~
Ùees ceecesJecemeccet{es peeveeefle heg®<eesòececed~
me meJe&efJeÆpeefle ceeb meJe&YeeJesve Yeejle~~19~~Fefle  ieg¢eleceb  Mee?eefceocegòebâ  ceÙeeveIe~
SleoddyegodOJee yegefæceevmÙeelke=âleke=âlÙe§e Yeejle~~20~~
yasmÂtkîaramatÍto'hamakîarÂdapi cottamaÉ |
ato'smi loke vede ca prathitaÉ puruîottamaÉ ||18||
yo mÂmevamasammöÅho jÂnÂti puruîottamam |
sa sarvavidbhajati mÂØ sarvabhÂvena bhÂrata ||19||iti guhyatamaØ ïÂstramidamuktaØ mayÂnagha |
etadbuddhvÂ buddhimÂnsyÂtkçtakçtyaïca bhÂrata ||20||

Yatharth Geeta 368
This mysterious knowledge of Lord Krishn was most secret. He
told this to only devotees. Rather than for all, it was meant only for the
worthy who are spiritually ready to receive and profit by it. But when thesame secret teaching is put down in black and white, and appears inthe form of a book, it may seem that Lord Krishn has imparted it to all.But in truth it is only for those who are fit to receive it. Even the manifestform of Lord Krishn was not meant for all. But he kept nothing backfrom the worthy Arjun. Arjun could not have been saved if his charioteerhad kept secrets from him.
This uniqueness is to be found in all accomplished sages.
Ramkrishn Paramhansdev was once ecstatic. His disciples asked himfor the reason. Alluding to an eminent contemporary great soul, a realizedsage (who had controlled and subdued all his senses by  abstractmeditation), Ramkrishn said that on that day he too had become aParamhans like him. After a while he told the disciples who followedhim aspiring-with mind, action and speech-for freedom from passionand worldly attachment, ?Don?t ever be in doubt now. I am the Ram whowas born in Treta. I, too, am the Lord Krishn of Dwapar. I am theirsacred Soul. I am of their form. If you have to attain, behold me.?
In precisely the same way my Revered teacher used to say, ?Mark
you that I am but a messenger of God. Real sages are messengers ofthe all pervading, preeminent, changeless Supreme Spirit; and it isthrough them that his message is received.? Jesus Christ exhortedmen to come to him, all who labour and are heavily laden, and he wouldgive them rest by revealing to them God his Father (Matthew, 11:28).So everyone can be a son of God. Albeit it is a different matter thatgoing to sages is made possible only through sincere striving for theaccomplishment of worship and meditation. In Surah II of the Koran,Allah reveals: ?Lo! We have  sent you (O Mohammad) with the truth, abringer of glad tidings and a messenger.?? The Revered Maharaj Ji usedto say the same about himself to all. He neither supported norcontradicted any view or doctrine; but he did tell those who earnestlycraved for liberation from passions and worldly attachment: ?Just look

Chapter 15 369
at my form. If you aspire for the ultimate Spirit, contemplate me and
have no doubt.? There were many who were skeptical, but, throughdemonstrating by personal experience and conduct, and even by beratingthem, he made them give up their irrelevant assumptions among whichare included the many rituals and ceremonies dwelt upon by Lord Krishnin verses 40-43 of Chapter 2, and thus induced them to have faith inhim. He exists timelessly as an accomplished sage. Likewise, althoughLord Krishn?s glory was a mystery, he revealed it to his earnest devotee,worthy and affectionate Arjun. This is  possible with every worshiperand sages have thus brought millions onto the spiritual path.
???????????????
Lord Krishn said at the beginning of the chapter that the world is
a tree like the Peepal. But the Peepal is just an analogy. Its root is theGod above and all nature is its branches that spread below. The onewho gains awareness of the tree along with its root is well-versed in theVed. The branches of this world-tree as well as its roots are everywhere,high and low, because it has sprung from the God whose seed-theSoul-resides within the heart of every being.
There is the myth that, seated on the lotus once, Brahma
speculated over his origin. He entered the stem of the lotus from whichhe was born and went deeper and deeper into it. He penetrated evendeeper, but he could not see the source of his birth. So in despair heresumed his seat on the lotus. Then through restraint of  mind andmeditation he at last discovered his fountainhead in the Supreme Spiritand extolled him, whereupon God himself revealed to him that althoughhe exists everywhere, he can be found only within the heart. The onewho contemplates him within the sphere of his heart realizes him.
Brahma is a symbol. He represents the emergence of the ideal
state from the mature practice of yog. The mind that is inclined towardsGod and possessed of knowledge of the Supreme Spirit is Brahma.Although growing in water, the lotus is unstained and pure. When themind wanders about in quest it does not gain its object, but seated on

Yatharth Geeta 370
an immaculate seat with total self-restraint, the same mind realizes
God within the heart when it reaches the stage of dissolution of thatrestraint itself.
Here, too, the world is a tree, whose roots and boughs are
everywhere. It stands for the worldly fetters that bind only human beingsin accordance with their actions. The other forms only suffer theconsequences of these actions. So Lord Krishn implores Arjun to severthis Peepal-like world tree with the axe of firm renunciation and seek forthe supreme goal, after achieving which sages are not reborn.
As to how to know that the tree has been cut down, the Yogeshwar
says that the man who is free from pride and ignorance, who hasovercome the evil of attachment, whose desires have come to an end,and who is liberated from conflicts, attains to the final beatitude.Illuminated by neither the sun nor the moon, nor by fire, the God who isthe ultimate state is self-radiant. What is essential for this spiritualachievement is firm conviction that the one after approaching whomthere is no reversion is the supreme abode, and that all are equallyentitled to it because the embodied Soul is but an immaculate part ofLord Krishn himself.
When the Soul gives up a body, he carries the inclinations of its
mind and five senses into the new body he assumes. If the sanskar isenlightened and morally good, the Soul attains to the level ofenlightenment and moral virtue. If he bears rajas-dominated sanskar,he gets through to the medium level. And if the sanskar is characterizedby tamas, the Soul climbs down to birth in lower forms of life and indulgesin sensual pleasures through their mind that controls the senses. Thisis usually not seen, for the vision that is needed to perceive it is thevision of knowledge. Just memorizing something is not knowledge. Yogiare enabled to see it only by concentrating the mind on the Self. Thusknowledge is achieved from practice and accomplishment, although itis true that study of sacred works inclines one to it. Men who are skepticaland devoid of accomplishment do not gain the desired object eventhough they endeavour hard for it.

Chapter 15 371
Thus there is here a portrayal of the stage of realization. So it is
but natural that the attributes of this stage are dwelt upon. Throwing
light upon them, Lord Krishn says that he is the light of the sun and themoon, and he is also the brightness of fire. It is his fire that accepts andassimilates the food that reaches the state of readiness by four ways.In the words of Lord Krishn, God is the only food (such is the verdict ofthe Upanishad in which the idea occurs) after tasting which the Soul isfully contented. The food generated from the stage of baikhari to para isreadied and consumed, and even the worshiper, the recipient of thisfood, ceases to exist. However, this achievement cannot be possibleuntil there is a sage-teacher -the charioteer who restrains, guides, andprompts.
Stressing the same point, Lord Krishn states that it is he who,
residing in the heart of all beings, generates memory. He causes themto recall the God who was forgotten. He is also the knowledge thatcomes with this memory. It is also by him that the hurdles in the wayare surmounted. He alone is fit to be known and he, too, is the one whorepresents the end of this knowledge after it is known. And since afterthis point the knower and the known are one, knowledge is irrelevant,for now who is there to know and who to be known. Lord Krishn isknower of the Ved- of the divine truth. He has said that he who knowsthe world-tree along with its root is versed in the knowledge of Ved, butthis knowledge comes only to him who cuts down the tree. Now hesays that he is knower of the Ved. He counts himself as one of thosewho are initiated into the wisdom of the Ved. So Lord Krishn too is herea sage-knower of the Ved, the knowledge of which the all of mankind isentitled to.
At the end it is said that the world has two kinds of beings. All the
bodies of beings are transitory, but the same being is imperishable inthe state when the mind is steady, although it is subject to contradictions.And even higher than this is the transcendental
God who is said to be unmanifest and eternal, and who is indeed
unique. This is the being beyond transience and permanence; this is

Yatharth Geeta 372
the ultimate being. As one with this being, Lord Krishn is thus also the
same-beyond the destructible and the indestructible-because of whichhe is known as the Supreme Being. Enlightened seekers who know theSupreme Spirit thus worship Lord Krishn wholeheartedly. There is noanomaly in their knowledge.
It is this most (secret) knowledge that Lord Krishn imparts to
Arjun. Sages of attainment do not reveal it to all, but they also do nothide it from the deserving. If it is hidden from them, how will they achievetheir object?
Thus concludes the Fifteenth Chapter, in the Upanishad of the
Shreemadbhagwadgeeta, on the Knowledge of the Supreme
Spirit, the Discipline of Yog, and the Dialogue between
Lord Krishn and Arjun, entitled:
?Purushottam Yog??
or
??The Yog of the Supreme Being??.
Thus concludes the Most Revered Paramhans Paramanand Ji?s
disciple Swami Adgadanand?s exposition of the Fifteenth
Chapter of the Shreemadbhagwadgeeta in ??Yatharth Geeta??,
entitled: ?Purushottam Yog??.
HARI OM TAT SAT

Chapter 16 373
CHAPTER 16
THE YOG OF TELLING
THE DIVINE FROM THE DEMONIACAL
Yogeshwar Krishn has a unique style of posing a problem. He
first indicates the peculiarities of the issue in order to compel attention
to it, and then elaborates and explains it. His treatment of action may
be cited as an instance of this. In Chapter 2 he exhorted Arjun to act.He then suggested to him in Chapter 3 that he ought to undertake the
ordained action. Elucidating its nature he pointed out that the performance
of yagya is action. Subsequently, before describing the nature of yagyahe dwelt upon its or igin as well as upon what it has to offer us. In Chapter
4, he resorted to more than a dozen ways to unravel the nature ofyagya, the doing of which is action. It is now that the meaning of actionis made clear: that in the true sense it denotes yogic contemplation and
worship which are accomplished by the operation of the mind and senses.
In similar fashion Lord Krishn named the treasure of divinity and
the accumulated hoard of demoniacal impulses in Chapter 9. Afterstressing their main features he told Arjun that men with demoniacal
nature regard him but as a contemptible mortal. He has after all a humanbody and it is in this form that he has attained to his supreme state. But
they who are evil and ignorant refuse to adore him. Blessed with the
treasure of divinity, on the other hand, his devotees meditate upon himwith single-mindedness. However, the nature of divine and demoniacal
impulses has not yet been made clear. It is only in the present chapter
that this task is undertaken and the first to be presented are attributesof the treasure of divinity.
1. ?The Lord said, ?Fearlessness, inner purity, steadfastness of
yog for knowledge, charity, continence, yagya, study of
scriptures, penance, and uprightness,...??
ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
DeYeÙeb meòJemebMegefæ%ee&veÙeesieJÙeJeefmLeefle:~oeveb oce§e Ùe%e§e mJeeOÙeeÙemlehe Deepe&Jeced~~1~~ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-
abhayaØ sattvasaØïuddhirjáÂnayogavyavasthitiÉ |dÂnaØ damaïca yajáaïca svÂdhyÂyastapa Ârjavam ||1||

Yatharth Geeta 374
Deefnbmee melÙece?eâesOemlÙeeie: MeeefvlejhewMegveced~
oÙee Yetles<JeueesueghlJeb ceeo&Jeb ÜerjÛeeheueced~~2~~Total absence of fear, inner sanctity, constant endeavour and
meditation to acquire the truth, complete self-surrender, subduing of
the mind and senses, conduct of yagya (as laid down by Lord Krishn inChapter 4), offering sacrifice to the fire of self-restraint as well as to thefire of the senses, offering pran and apan as oblation to each other, andlast of all the process of worship that entails sacrificing oneself to thefire of knowledge which is achieved by the inner workings of the mindand senses rather than by the yagya that is performed with oilseeds,barley-grains and an altar (Lord Krishn accepts no such ceremonial actor sacrificial rite as yagya ), meditation upon the Self which is thediscipline that prompts one towards the identical Supreme Spirit, penancethat moulds the mind along with the senses in accordance with thecherished goal, and integrity of the mind and heart as well as of thebody and its senses, are some of the traits that characterize piousmen.
2. ?Nonviolence, truthfulness, abstinence of anger, renunciation,
tranquility, absence of malice, compassion for all beings,
disinterestedness, tenderness, modesty, abstinence fromfutile effort...?
True nonviolence is salvaging of the Soul, for degrading the Soul
is violence. As Lord Krishn has avowed, he will be the destroyer of all
mankind and generator of varnsankar if he does not carry out his taskconscientiously. Since the character (varn) of the Self is that of God,his straying about amidst nature is varnasankar: this is injury to theSoul and his deliverance is nonviolence in the true sense. Truthfulnessis not speaking what is apparently real or pleasing. Is it truth when wesay that these clothes belong to us? There can be, in fact, no moreblatant a lie than this. If we are not masters of our own persons that aremutable, or changeable, how can the clothing that but covers thembelong to us? The Yogeshwar himself has spoken of the nature of truth
ahiØsÂ satyamakrodhastyÂgaÉ ïÂntirapaiïunam |
dayÂ bhöteîvaloluptvaØ mÂrdavaØ hrÍracÂpalam ||2||

Chapter 16 375
lespe: #ecee Oe=efle: MeewÛeceõesnes veeefleceeefvelee~
YeJeefvle  mecheob  owJeerceefYepeelemÙe  Yeejle~~3~~
ocYees oheexÓefYeceeve§e ?eâesOe: hee®<ÙecesJe Ûe~
De%eeveb ÛeeefYepeelemÙe heeLe& mecheoceemegjerced~~4~~to Arjun in asserting that  there is no  death of what is true in all the
three divisions of time-past, present, and future. The Self alone is true;he is the supreme truth. This is the truth we have to fix our eyes on.Some other attributes of a righteous man are abstinence from anger,surrender of whatever one has, renunciation of desire for the rewards ofgood as well as of evil action, absence of fickleness, avoidance ofundesirable acts that are contrary to the aspired-for goal, feeling ofmercy for all beings, non-attachment to objects even when the sensesare associated with them, feeling of tenderness, shame at strayingfrom the object, and keeping away from futile effort.
3. ?Magnificence, forgiveness, patience, purity of thought and
conduct, and absence of animosity and vanity are all attributes
of the man endowed with divine riches.??
Glory is a property of God alone and the one, who acts by virtue
of this divine magnificence partakes of it. No sooner did Angulimal look
at Mahatma Buddh than his thoughts were transmuted. This wasbecause of the inherent greatness of  Buddh-the greatness whichgenerates blessedness. Lord Krishn finally concludes his enumerationby telling Arjun that some other marks of the treasure of divinity areforgiveness, steady temper, innocence, hostility against none, and totalrejection of the feeling of conceit. In all twenty-six attributes are thuscatalogued and, whereas all of them subsist only in a seeker whosemeditation has ripened to maturity, they partially exist in all of us. Theylie in dormancy  even in men who are dominated by evil impulses and itis because of this that even the most fallen sinner is entitled to r edemption.
4. ?Ostentation, arrogance and conceit as well as wrath, harsh
speech, and ignorance are all, O Parth, the qualities of a manwith devilish character.?
tejaÉ kîamÂ dhçitiÉ ïaucamadroho nÂtimÂnitÂ |
bhavanti sanpadaØ daivÍmabhijÂtasya bhÂrata ||3||
dambho darpo'timÂnaïca krodhaÉ pÂruîyameva ca |
ajáÂnaØ cÂbhijÂtasya pÂrtha sanpadamÂsurÍm ||4||

Yatharth Geeta 376
owJeer mecheefÉcees#eeÙe efveyevOeeÙeemegjer celee~
cee MeggÛe: mecheob owJeerceefYepeeleesÓefme heeC[Je~~5~~
Éew Yetlemeieez ueeskesâÓefmcevowJe Deemegj SJe Ûe~owJees efJemlejMe: Øeesòeâ Deemegjb heeLe& ces ëe=Ceg~~6~~
ØeJe=efòeb Ûe efveJe=efòeb Ûe pevee ve efJeogjemegje:~
ve MeewÛeb veeefhe ÛeeÛeejes ve melÙeb les<eg efJeÅeles~~7~~Now the respective operations of the two kinds of character are
elaborated.
5. ?Since it is established, O Pandav, that while the treasure of
divinity liberates and the demoniacal state acts as a shackle,
you have no need to grieve for you are blessed with divineriches.?
Possessed as he is of a sacred disposition, Arjun will surely attain
to salvation and thus to the state of Lord Krishn himself. But in whom
do the wealth of divinity and demoniacal impulses abide?
6. ?There are in the world, O Parth, two kinds of beings, the
pious, on whom I have already dwelt at length, and the devilish
of whom you will now hear from me.?
There are in the world two kinds of men, godlike and demon-like.
When sacred impulses are active within the heart, man is godlike; but
he turns devilish if he is rife with demoniacal inclinations. Whether bornin Arabia or Australia or anywhere else, people all over the world aredivided into only these two classes. After having spoken at length sofar of godly disposition Lord Krishn now proceeds to enlighten Arjun onthe traits of demoniacal temper.
7. ?Wanting in inclination to both engage in proper action and
avoid improper acts, the demoniacal have neither purity nor
the right conduct, nor even truthfulness.?
Men with devilish predilections are ignorant both of that which is
worthy of being done and of that which ought to be escaped because it
is unrighteous. So they are bereft of innocence, just conduct, and of
daivÍ sanpadvimokîÂya nibandhÂyÂsurÍ matÂ |
mÂ ïucaÉ sanpadaØ daivÍmabhijÂto'si pÂàÅava ||5||
dvau bhötasargau loke'smindaiva Âsura eva ca |daivo vistaraïaÉ prokta ÂsuraØ pÂrtha me ïçàu ||6||
pravçttiØ ca nivçttiØ ca janÂ na vidurÂsurÂÉ |
na ïaucaØ nÂpi cÂcÂro na satyaØ teîu vidyate ||7||

Chapter 16 377
DemelÙeceØeefle?b les peieoengjveerÕejced~
DehejmhejmecYetleb efkeâcevÙelkeâecenwlegkeâced~~8~~
Sleeb Âef°ceJe°YÙe ve°elceeveesÓuheyegæÙe:~ØeYeJevlÙeg«ekeâcee&Ce: #eÙeeÙe peieleesÓefnlee:~~9~~
keâececeeefßelÙe og<hetjb ocYeceeveceoeefvJelee:~
ceesneoddie=nerlJeemeodd«eenevØeJele&vlesÓMeggefÛe?elee:~~10~~efÛevleeceheefjcesÙeeb Ûe ØeueÙeevleecegheeefßelee:~
keâeceesheYeesiehejcee SleeJeefoefle efveef§elee:~~11~~the eternal verities. How their minds function is represented in the
following verse:
8. ?Since the world, they say, is unreal, without shelter and God,
and created by itself through mutual (male-female) intercourse,
what else is it for except physical indulgence??
With such an assumption, the only purpose of worldly life is
enjoyment of sensual pleasures. What else is there besides them?9. ?Depraved and dim-witted because they hold such a view,
these malicious and cruel people are born only to ravage the
world.??
 With their nature corrupted by their dependence on a mistaken
outlook, the only purpose of their existence is to destroy others.10. ?Possessed of arrogance, conceit and wantonness, and
immersed in insatiable lust, they subscribe to false doctrines
out of ignorance and act wickedly.?
Maddened by ego and cherishing desires that cannot be satisfied,
these ignorant persons entertain mistaken beliefs and indulge in religious
practices that are in fact unholy and corrupt. Even the presumably sacred
ceremonies and sacrificial rites performed by them are nothing but
perversions.
11. ?Beset by countless anxieties that stretch right up to death
and absorbed in the enjoyment of sensual objects, they are
firmly convinced that satisfaction of carnal desires is the
highest goal.??
asatyamapratiîòhaØ te jagadÂhuranÍïvaram |
aparasparasambhötaØ kimanyatkÂmahaitukam ||8||
etÂØ dçîòimavaîòabhya naîòÂtmÂno'lpabuddhayaÉ |prabhavantyugrakarmÂàaÉ kîayÂya jagato'hitaÉ ||9||
kÂmamÂïritya duîpuraØ dambhamÂnamadÂnvitÂÉ |
mohÂdgçhÍtvÂsadgrÂhÂnpravartante'ïucivratÂÉ ||10||cintÂmaparimeyÂØ ca pralayÂntÂmupÂïritÂÉ |
kÂmopabhogaparamÂ etÂvaditi niïcitÂÉ ||11||

Yatharth Geeta 378
DeeMeeheeMeMelewye&æe: keâece?eâesOehejeÙeCee:~
F&nvles keâeceYeesieeLe&cevÙeeÙesveeLe&meÃeÙeeved~~12~~FoceÅe ceÙee ueyOeefceceb ØeehmÙes ceveesjLeced~
Focemleeroceefhe ces YeefJe<Ùeefle hegveOe&veced~~13~~
Demeew ceÙee nle: Me$egn&efve<Ùes Ûeehejeveefhe~F&ÕejesÓncenb Yeesieer efmeæesÓnb yeueJeevmegKeer~~14~~
Dee{?eesÓefYepeveJeeveefmce keâesÓvÙeesÓefmle meÂMees ceÙee~
Ùe#Ùes  oemÙeeefce  ceesefo<Ùe  FlÙe%eeveefJeceesefnlee:~~15~~Gratification of sensual desires is the only happiness for them
and they are so enamoured of this thought that they strive only to have
as much of pleasure as they can, for there is to them nothing beyond this.
12. ?Chained by hundreds of bonds of illusory hopes, and at the
mercy of desire and anger, they wrongfully endeavour to store
wealth for the satisfaction of their lust.?
Even a single rope is sufficient to hang a person, while these
people are enmeshed in innumerable aspirations.
Addicted to lust and anger, they are engaged day and night in
wrongfully amassing of riches for the gratification of sensual desires. It
is further said in this context:
13. ?Their perpetual thought is: I have gained this today and I
shall have that wish; I have these riches and I shall have
more in the future.?And-
14. ?I have slain that enemy and l shall also slay other enemies;
I am God and the holder of sovereignty.
 Besides being under the illusion that they are perfect, strong,
and happy, they are also vain regarding their great fortune and noble
birth, and they mistakenly believe that they are unequalled.
15. ?Thus deluded by ignorance they think: I am wealthy and
noble-born. Who can equal me? I shall perform yagya, give
alms, and lead a life of bliss.?
ÂïÂpÂïaïatairbaddhÂÉ kÂmakrodhaparÂyaàÂÉ |
Íhante kÂmabhogÂrthamanyÂyenÂrthasaácayÂn ||12||idamadya mayÂ labdhamidaØ prÂpsye manoratham |
idamastÍdamapi me bhaviïyati punardhanam ||13||
asau mayÂ hataÉ ïatrurhaniîye cÂparÂnapi |Íïvaro'hamahaØ bhogÍ siddho'haØ balavÂnsukhÍ ||14||
ÂÅhyo'bhijanavÂnasmi ko'nyo'sti sadriïo mayÂ |
yakîye dÂsyÂmi modiîya ityajáÂnavimohitÂÉ ||15||

Chapter 16 379
DeveskeâefÛeòeefJeYeüevlee ceesnpeeuemeceeJe=lee:~
Øemeòeâe: keâeceYeesies<eg heleefvle vejkesâÓMegÛeew~~16~~
DeelcemecYeeefJelee: mleyOee OeveceeveceoeefvJelee:~Ùepevles veeceÙe%ewmles ocYesveeefJeefOehetJe&keâced~~17~~
Den¿ejb yeueb oheË keâeceb ?eâesOeb Ûe mebefßelee:~
ceeceelcehejosns<eg ØeefÉ<evleesÓYÙemetÙekeâe:~~18~~They are victims of even more delusions. However, there is a
problem here. All that these men do are said to be an outcome of
ignorance. Is it, we may ask, also ignorance to practice yagya and
charity? Before further dwelling upon the problem in the seventeenthverse, Lord Krishn takes up the question of the ultimate end of these
ignorant, deluded men.
16. ?Misled in many a way, entangled in the webs of attachment,
and inordinately fond of sensual pleasure, they fall into the
most defiled hell.?
 Lord Krishn will later throw light upon the nature of this hell, but in
the meantime he reverts to the problem of the apparently sacred acts
of the ignorant:
17. ??These conceited persons, intoxicated by vanity and wealth,
offer ostentatious sacrifices which are yagya only in name,
in violation of scriptural injunction.??
 Rendered arrogant and senseless by wealth and worldly honour,
these persons perform ceremonies and sacrificial rites which are only
nominally yagya, and sacrilegious to boot. They do not observe the
mode of worship laid down by Yogeshwar Krishn in verses 24-33 and
10-17 of the fourth and sixth chapters respectively.
18. ?Subservient to vanity, brute force, arrogance, lust and anger,
these wicked and degraded persons have a feeling of enmity
to me who dwells in them and in all others.??
According to scripture, memory of God is yagya. They who forsake
this way and perform only nominal yagya, or do something or the other
instead of yagya, abhor God and are hostile to him. But there are persons
anekacittavibhrÂntÂ mohajÂlasamÂvçtÂÉ |
prasaktÂÉ kÂmabhogeîu patanti narake'ïucau ||16||
ÂtmasambhÂvitÂÉ stabdhÂ dhanamÂnamadÂnvitÂÉ |yajante nÂmayajáaiste dambhenÂvidhipörvakam ||17||
ahaßkÂraØ balaØ darpaØ kÂmaØ krodhaØ ca sanïritÂÉ |
mÂmÂtmaparadeheîu pradviîanto'bhyasöyakÂÉ ||18||

Yatharth Geeta 380
leevenb efÉ<ele: ?etâjevmebmeejs<eg vejeOeceeved~
ef#eheecÙepe?eceMegYeeveemegjer<JesJe Ùeesefve<eg~~19~~
DeemegjeR Ùeesefveceehevvee cet{e pevceefve pevceefve~
ceeceØeehÙewJe keâewvlesÙe lelees ÙeevlÙeOeceeb ieefleced~~20~~ef$eefJeOeb  vejkeâmÙesob  Éejb  veeMeveceelceve:~
keâece: ?eâesOemleLee ueesYemlemceeoslel$eÙeb lÙepesled~~21~~who continue to abhor and are yet saved. Are these enemies of God
also going to be saved? Lord Krishn?s answer to the question is that itis not so.
19. ?I forever condemn these abhorring, degraded, and cruel
persons, the most abject, among mankind, to demoniacal
births.??
 They who worship in transgression of scriptural ordinance are
the lowly-born and the most degraded of people, and it is they who are
judged to be perpetrators of cruel deeds. Lord Krishn has declared earlierthat he hurls such degraded persons down into hell. Now he reiteratesthe same when he says that he dooms them to perpetual devilish births.This is hell. If the torments of a common prison are terrible, how muchmore so must be the endless fall into inferior forms of life? So it isimperative that one must always strive to acquire the treasure of divinity.
20. ?Instead of realizing me, O son of Kunti, these ignorant fools,
conceived in devilish wombs birth after birth, are doomed to
fall yet lower to the most degraded state.??
This degradation is given the name of hell. So let us now view the
origin of this hell.21. ?Since lust, anger, and greed are the three gateways to hell
because they are destructive of the Self, they ought to be
forsaken.?
Lust, anger, and greed are the three bases on which demoniacal
impulses rest. So giving them up is a profitable enterprise.
tÂnahaØ dviîataÉ krörÂnsaØsÂreîu narÂdhamÂn |
kîipÂmyajasramaïubhÂnÂsurÍîveva yoniîu ||19||
ÂsurÍØ yonimÂpannÂ mödhÂ janmani janmani |
mÂmaprÂpyaiva kaunteya tato yÂntyadhamÂØ gatim ||20||trividhaØ narakasyedaØ dvÂraØ nÂïanamÂtmanaÉ |
kÂmaÉ krodhastathÂ lobhastasmÂdetattrayaØ tyajet ||21||

Chapter 16 381
SlewefJe&cegòeâ:  keâewvlesÙe  leceesÉejwef?eefYeve&j:~
DeeÛejlÙeelceve: ßesÙemlelees Ùeeefle hejeb ieefleced~~22~~
Ùe: Mee?eefJeefOeceglme=pÙe Jele&les keâecekeâejle:~
ve me efmeefæceJeehe>esefle ve megKeb ve hejeb ieefleced~~23~~lemceeÛÚe?eb ØeceeCeb les keâeÙee&keâeÙe&JÙeJeefmLeleew~
%eelJee Mee?eefJeOeeveesòebâ keâce& keâleg&efcenen&efme~~24~~22. ?The person, O son of Kunti, who escapes these three doors
to hell, practices what is propitious for them and thus attains
to the Supreme State.?
Only by keeping away from these three ways to hell is a person
equipped for conduct that may reward them with sublime good and the
final beatitude of attaining to Lord Krishn. Only by abandoning the three
perversions can a person perform the ordained task, the outcome ofwhich is the ultimate glory of redemption.
23. ?The one who transgresses scriptural injunction and acts
indiscriminately according to his will achieves neither
perfection nor the Supreme Goal, nor even happiness.?
The scripture in question is none other than the Geeta itself, which
Lord Krishn has described as ?the most mysterious of all knowledge? in
the twentieth verse of Chapter 15. The Geeta is the perfect scripture;
and the one who ignores it and acts willfully is deprived of
accomplishment, salvation, and bliss.
24. ?So scripture is the authority on what ought and ought not to
be done, and having learnt that you have the ability to act
according to the provisions laid down by the scripture.??
In the eighth verse of Chapter 3, too, Lord Krishn told Arjun to do
the ordained task. Besides stressing the ordained action, he has also
pointed out that yagya is that action. Yagya is an image of that special
form of worship which completely subdues the mind and leads one tothe eternal, immutable God. He now adds that desire, wrath, and avarice
are the three main approaches to hell. Only after renouncing these three
evils does action commence-the appointed action which Lord Krishn
etairvimuktaÉ kaunteya tamodvÂraistribhirnaraÉ |
ÂcaratyÂtmanaÉ ïreyastato yÂti parÂØ gatim ||22||
yaÉ ïÂstravidhimutsçjya vartate kÂmakÂrataÉ |
na sa siddhimavÂpnoti na sukhaØ na parÂØ gatim ||23||tasmÂcchÂstraØ pramÂàaØ te kÂryÂkÂryavyavasthitau |
jáÂtvÂ ïÂstravidhÂnoktaØ karma kartumihÂrhasi ||24||

Yatharth Geeta 382
has repeatedly portrayed as the conduct which brings one the highest
glory and supreme good. The more a person is engaged in externalworldly business, the more alluring is the form in which desire, anger,and greed manifest themselves to him. The ordained action is on theother hand something to which access is secured only after the givingup of lust, wrath, and greed, and it is only then that such action istransformed into habitual conduct. For the person who rejects it  andacts willfully, there is neither happiness nor accomplishment, nor theultimate absolution. And scripture is the only authority that prescribesthe righteous as well as the unrighteous. So it is incumbent upon Arjunto conduct himself according to scripture and that scripture is the Geeta.
???????????????
At the beginning of the chapter Yogeshwar Krishn has given an
elaborate account of the pious impulses that constitute the treasure ofdivinity. Steady meditation, total self-surrender, inner sanctity, restraintof the senses, subduing the mind, study that reminds one of the Self,striving towards yagya, mortification of the senses along with the mind,absence of anger, and calm intellect are among its twenty-six attributesthat have been pointed out. All of these virtues dwell only in thoseworshipers who are engaged in the practice of yog and have comeclose to the desired goal, but they exist partially in all-in you as well asme.
Subsequently, Lord Krishn has named about half a dozen
deviations such as ignorance, arrogance, vanity, and cruelty that makeup the demoniacal hoard. Finally, then, he pronounces the verdict,addressing Arjun, that whereas the riches of piety bring about perfectliberation and realization of the Supreme State, the store of devilishimpulses shackles and degrades the Self. But Arjun is at the sametime assured that he need not despair, for he is blessed with the treasureof divinity.
Which, however, are the abodes of the righteous and of the
unrighteous impulses? Discoursing on this, Lord Krishn has said that

Chapter 16 383
people?s disposition is of two kinds, the pious and the impious. A person
is godly if there is an abundance of the divine impulses in him, but isdevilish if he teems with vices. Wherever they are born and whatevernames they are known by, people cannot but belong to one of thesetwo classes.
Lord Krishn then gives a detailed account of the attributes of men
who are cursed with evil disposition. Men with unrighteous predilectionshave no inkling of how to undertake action that is worth doing, nor ofhow to abstain from that which is unworthy. Since they have notundertaken action, there is in them neither truth nor purity, nor the rightconduct. According to them the world has neither any shelter nor God,and is just mechanically generated by carnal intercourse. So, indulgenceis their ultimate goal, for there is nothing beyond it for them. Such adelusion was common in Lord Krishn?s age, too. In fact, it has alwaysexisted. It is not that only Charvak
1 has propagated such a view; it will
be there so long as the human psyche is subject to the rise and ebb ofdivine and devilish instincts. According to Lord Krishn, dim-witted, cruelmen are born only to harm others and to destroy whatever is propitious.They insist that since they have slain one foe, they will now slay another.So Lord Krishn tells Arjun that rather than slaying their foes these menwho are slaves to lust and anger are really hostile to him-the God thatexists within them as well as all  others. Did Arjun kill Jayadrath
2 and
others under a vow? If he did, he is but a demoniacal character. He isthen an enemy of God. But Lord Krishn has explicitly declared thatArjun is blessed with divine riches. That is  why he has been counsellednot to despair. There is thus another  evidence here that God resides inthe hearts of all. It ought to be kept in mind that there is a power abovethat is constantly watching us. So it is essential that our conduct andperformance of action should be in keeping with what is ordained byscripture, or else there is imminent punishment.
Yogeshwar Krishn has said that he forever hurls down demoniacal,
cruel men, again and again, into hell. But what is the form of this hell?According to Lord Krishn, hell is repeatedly falling into low, sordid births;

Yatharth Geeta 384
they are thus synonymous expressions. This degradation of the Self is
hell; and lust, anger and greed are the three chief gateways to it. Theseare the three bases of demoniacal tendencies. Only a renunciation ofthese three marks the commencement of the action which has timeand again been discoursed upon by Lord Krishn. Lust, anger, and greedappear even more tempting to those who are the more intensely absorbedin worldly affairs or even in decorous fulfillment of social obligations.Truly, therefore, only by eschewing these three does one gainadmittance to the ordained action. And the scripture- the Geeta - is,therefore, the only authority to turn to, when one is faced by the dilemmaof what to do and what not to do - of that which is worthy of doing andthat which is unworthy. So the injunction is, to undertake only the uniqueaction, ordained by this holy book - the true action.
Thus Yogeshwar Krishn has, in this chapter, elaborately described
divine as well as devilish impulses and indicated that the human heartitself is the habitat of both.
Thus concludes the Sixteenth Chapter, in the Upanishad of the
Shreemadbhagwadgeeta, on the Knowledge of Supreme Spirit,
the Science of Yog, and the Dialogue between
Lord Krishn and Arjun, entitled:
?Daivasur Sampad-Vibhag Yog?
or
??The Yog of Telling the Divine from the Demoniacal??.
Thus concludes the Most Revered Paramhans Paramanand Ji?s
disciple Swami Adgadanand?s exposition of the Sixteenth
Chapter of the Shreemadbhagwadgeeta in ??Yatharth Geeta??,
entitled: ?Daivasur Sampad-Vibhag Yog?.
HARI OM TAT SAT

Chapter 17 385
CHAPTER 17
THE YOG
OF THREEFOLD FAITH
Yogeshwar Krishn explicitly said at the end of Chapter 16 that the
action which he has repeatedly spoken of commences only after the
renunciation of desire, anger, and greed. It is the action withoutaccomplishing which there is neither happiness nor perfection, nor thefinal beatitude. Scripture is, therefore, the authority to fall back uponwhenever we are faced by the dilemma of that which is worthy of beingdone and that which is unworthy-of that which we should do and thatwhich we should not. And that scripture is the Geeta, the epitome of themost esoteric knowledge. There are other scriptures, too, but it is of theutmost importance that we always keep our eyes fixed on the Geeta. Ifwe seek elsewhere we may stray, for the systematic, straight approachof the Geeta is not to be found anywhere else.
Thereafter Arjun asks the Lord to enlighten him on the state of
persons who worship in contravention of the scriptural ordinance althoughwith staunch faith. Are they sattwiki, rajasi or tamasi? Are they righteous,impassioned, or diabolical? Arjun wishes to be enlightened on thisbecause he has learnt earlier that whatever be the property:- sattwa,rajas or tamas, it is determined by the nature of one?s birth. It is for thisreason that at the very outset of the chapter he raises the question.
1. ?Arjun said, ?What, O Krishn, is the property-sattwa, rajas, or
tamas of persons who albeit worship with faith but in disregard
of the scriptural ordinance?? ??
Depeg&ve GJeeÛe-
Ùes Mee?eefJeefOeceglme=pÙe Ùepevles ßeæÙeeefvJelee:~
les<eeb efve?e leg keâe ke=â<Ce meòJeceenes jpemlece:~~1~~arjuna uvÂca-
ye ïÂstravidhimutsçjya yajante ïraddhayÂnvitÂÉ |
teîÂØ niîòhÂ tu kÂ kçîàa sattvamÂho rajastamaÉ ||1||

Yatharth Geeta 386
ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
ef$eefJeOee YeJeefle ßeæe osefnveeb mee mJeYeeJepee~meeefòJekeâer jepemeer ÛewJe leecemeer Ûesefle leeb ëe=Ceg~~2~~
meòJeeveg¤hee meJe&mÙe ßeæe YeJeefle Yeejle~
ßeæeceÙeesÓÙeb heg®<ees Ùees ÙeÛÚ^æ: me SJe me:~~3~~To resolve Arjun?s doubt Lord Krishn then classifies faith too as
being of three kinds.
2. ?The Lord said, ?Listen to me on how the faith arising from
people?s innate nature, too, is of three kinds, virtuous,
impassioned, and blind.???
 In Chapter 2, the Yogeshwar told Arjun that the prescribed action
in yog, in both the Way of Selfless Action and the Way of Discrimination,
is the same. The mind which is earnestly and firmly given to selflessaction is aimed in a single direction. The minds of ignorant persons are,on the contrary, endlessly divided, because of which they inventcountless different ways. Their minds are riddled with innumerable
dissensions and they not only devise various rites and ceremonies, but
also flaunt them in flowery and alluring words. Unfortunately they whopay heed to these alluring words are also deluded, as a result of whichthey fail to do that which is worthwhile and just. The same is reiteratedhere in a different way when Lord Krishn points out that the faith ofpersons who worship in transgression of the scriptural injunction is ofthree kinds. The current of faith flowing in the human heart, is either
good or fervent or insensible.
3. ?Since the faith of all people, O Bharat, is according to their
inherent propensity and man is reverent, he is what his faith
is.??
The faith of all persons is according to their natural inclination.
Man is by nature a creature of faith. It is thus that a person?s character
bears a close resemblance to the character of their faith. We are often
asked who we are. Some of us say that we are Soul. But YogeshwarKrishn contradicts this: like the nature of their inherent disposition is
their faith, and so thus is the person.
ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-
trividhÂ bhavati ïraddhÂ dehinÂØ sÂ svabhÂvajÂ |sÂttvikÍ rÂjasÍ caiva tÂmasÍ ceti tÂØ ïçàu ||2||
sattvÂnuröpÂ sarvasya ïraddhÂ bhavati bhÂrata |
ïraddhÂmayo?yaØ puruîo yo yacchraddhaÉ sa eva saÉ||3

Chapter 17 387
Ùepevles meeefòJekeâe osJeevÙe#ej#eebefme jepemee:~
ØesleevYetleieCeeb§eevÙes Ùepevles leecemee pevee:~~4~~
DeMee?eefJeefnleb Ieesjb lehÙevles Ùes lehees pevee:~ocYeen¿ejmebÙegòeâe: keâecejeieyeueeefvJelee:~~5~~
keâMe&Ùevle:  MejerjmLeb  Yetle«eececeÛesleme:~
ceeb ÛewJeevle:MejerjmLeb leeefvJeæ?eemegjefve§eÙeeved~~6~~The Geeta provides an insight into what true yog is. Maharshi
Patanjali was also a yogi and we have his yog system of philosophy.
According to him yog is perfect restraint of the mind. And the use ofthis arduous discipline is that in this state the onlooker, the individualSoul enshrined in the human body, comes to rest firmly in his owneternal, true counterpart. Is he tainted before this union? In Patanjali?sview the Soul is earlier the same as the predilection of the man whoembodies it. And Lord Krishn now affirms that man is naturally endowedwith the quality of faith, indeed totally immersed in it. There is somededication in him and he is moulded by the character of his faith. A manis what his natural inclination is. At this point, Lord Krishn proceeds tocatalogue the three kinds of faith.
4. ?While the virtuous worship gods and the impassioned and
morally blind worship yaksh and demons, they who are
blinded by ignorance worship ghosts and nature-spirits.??
 We all labour tirelessly to worship what our hearts are inclined to
and what we revere.5-6. ?Mark you that they who undergo terrible self-mortification
without scriptural sanction and are afflicted with hypocrisy
and arrogance besides lust, attachment, and vanity of power,and who wear out not only the elements that form their bodiesbut also me who dwells in their Souls, are ignorant men withevil disposition.??
The Soul is rendered feeble by maladies when it slips into the
fissures of nature, whereas yagya provides him strength. Arjun is,
yajante sÂttvikÂ devÂnyakîarakîÂØsi rÂjasÂÉ |
pretÂnbhötagaàÂØïcÂnye yajante tÂmasÂ janÂÉ ||4||
aïÂstravihitaØ ghoraØ tapyante ye tapo janÂÉ |dambhÂhaßkÂrasaØyuktÂÉ kÂmarÂgabalÂnvitaÉ ||5||
karîayantaÉ ïarÍrasthaØ bhötagrÂmamacetasaÉ |
mÂØ caivÂntaÉ ïarÍrasthaØ tÂnviddhyÂsuraniïcayÂn ||6||

Yatharth Geeta 388
DeenejmlJeefhe meJe&mÙe ef$eefJeOees YeJeefle efØeÙe:~
Ùe%emlehemleLee oeveb les<eeb Yesoefceceb ëe=Ceg~~7~~
DeeÙeg:meòJeyeueejesiÙemegKeØeerefleefJeJeOe&vee:      ~jmÙee: efmveiOee: efmLeje ùÅee Deeneje: meeefòJekeâefØeÙee:~~8therefore, counselled to regard the ignorant, insensible people who do
injury to the Soul as unquestionably demoniacal. Thus is resolved theissue raised by Arjun.
Righteous persons who have forsaken the way shown by scripture
worship gods; they who are driven by passions worship yaksh anddemons; and the ignorant pray and bow to ghosts and spirits. They notonly worship, but indulge in the most agonizing exercises of penance.According to Lord Krishn, however, these acts of self-mortification onlysap the elements that make up their bodies and the God within theirSoul. Thus, instead of adoring the one true God and partaking of hisdivinity, they only further distance themselves from him. These personsought to be regarded as evil. This implies that even worshipers of godsare evil. There could be no stronger way of putting across the idea. Solet us resolve to only adore and pray to and worship that Supreme -Being of whom all these-the many gods, yaksh, demons, ghosts andspirits-are no more than tiny fractions. This has been repeatedlyemphasized by Lord Krishn.
7. ?Listen to me (as I tell you) the distinction between the three
kinds of yagya, penance, and alms, that are like the three
kinds of food relished according to individual taste.?
People love three kinds of food according to their respective taste
just as there are three kinds of faith; and there are likewise three kinds
of yagya, penance, and charity. The first to be categorized is food.
8. ?Food that is naturally pleasing and conducive to life, intellect,
strength, sound health, happiness, and satisfaction besides
being savoury, tender, and durable is loved by the virtuous.??
ÂhÂrastvapi sarvasya trividho bhavati priyaÉ |
yajáastapastathÂ dÂnaØ teîÂØ bhedamimaØ ïçàu ||7||
ÂyuÉsattvabalÂrogyasukhaprÍtivivardhanÂÉ |rasyÂÉ snigdhÂÉ sthirÂ hçdyÂ ÂhÂrÂÉ sÂttvikapriyÂÉ||8

Chapter 17 389
Apparently, according to Lord Krishn, food that is naturally
agreeable and good for strength, sound health, and intellect, and thus
for longevity, is good. And such food is dear to the righteous.
It is thus clear that no food as such has the property of ennobling
or of stimulating, or of depressing. So neither is milk perfect nor onionsinflaming, nor garlic a generator of baser instincts.
As for food that is conducive to good physique, healthy mind,
and sound health, the choice of people all over the world varies widelyaccording to environment and geographical condition and, of course,according to individual taste. Whereas rice is the staple food of some,others in other regions prefer bread made from wheat-flour. There arecountries where people subsist mainly on banana and potato. Muttonand fish, and even frogs, and horse-flesh are all accepted and enjoyedas food by inhabitants of different parts of the earth. An overwhelmingmajority of Europeans and Americans are eaters of beef and pork. Butthat has not in any way prevented them from being ranked first in mattersof learning, intellectual advancement, and economic progress.
According to the Geeta, food that is tasteful, tender, and nutritious
is sattwik. That food is good which is congenial and favourable to longlife, strengthening of both body and mind, and to sound health. But it isalso laid down that food that is naturally relished is good. So there is nouse saying that this food is pious while that is impious. The only tenableview is that, that food is good which is in keeping with the local situation,surroundings, place, and time, and which provides the requirednourishment. The use of an object, rather than the object itself, is whatmakes it good, morally objectionable, or evil.
So it is that food and drinks such as meat and alcoholic beverages
are uncongenial to a person who has renounced the home and family,and taken up the life of a sanyasi - renunciant - engaged in meditationupon God. Experience demonstrates that such victuals result in a stateof mind that is inimical to spiritual discipline. There is always a possibilitythat such food and drinks will lead the seeker astray from the way of

Yatharth Geeta 390
keâ?ddJecueueJeCeelÙeg<Celeer#Ce¤#eefJeoeefnve:~
Deeneje jepememÙes°e og:KeMeeskeâeceÙeØeoe:~~9~~ÙeeleÙeeceb ielejmeb hetefle heÙeg&ef<eleb Ûe Ùeled~
GefÛÚ°ceefhe ÛeecesOÙeb Yeespeveb leecemeefØeÙeced~~10~~
DeHeâueekeâe*ddef#eefYeÙe&%ees efJeefOeÂ°es Ùe FpÙeles~Ùe°JÙecesJesefle ceve: meceeOeeÙe me meeefòJekeâ:~~11~~attainment. So they who have chosen a life of seclusion because of
their disenchantment with worldly passions had better keep in mind theadvice about food that Lord Krishn has offered in Chapter 6. The properthing to do is to eat and drink only that which is favourable to worshipand adoration of God.
9. ?Bitter, sour, salty, too hot, pungent, rough, and acidic food
that gives rise to sorrow, worries, and illness, is preferred by
the passionate.?And -
10. ?Food that is half-cooked, unsavoury, odorous, stale, leftover,
and defiled is liked by men with a dull sensibility (tamas).??
Food which is not fresh, cooked long before, or half-cooked, that
which has lost its life-giving essence - is unholy. Losing its life-giving
essence does not mean that it has got less quantity of water. It meansthat food which is missing the nourishing elements. It means that foodwhich emits a foul smell is defiled too. Such food is liked by persons oftamas property.
The discussion of food is now closed and that of the next subject,
namely, yagya, taken up.
11. ?Yagya that has scriptural sanction and the performance of
which is an obligation, is fitting and auspicious when it is
practiced by persons with intent minds who aspire to noreward.?
The Geeta approves of such yagya. It was in Chapter 3 that Lord
Krishn First named yagya. ?Since the conduct of yagya is the only
kaòvamlalavaàÂtyuîàatÍkîàarökîavidÂhinaÉ |
ÂhÂrÂ rÂjasasyeîòÂ duÉkhaïokÂmayapradÂÉ ||9||yÂtayÂmaØ gatarasaØ pöti paryuîitaØ ca yat |
ucchiîòamapi cÂmedhyaØ bhojanaØ tÂmasapriyam ||10||
aphalÂkÂßkîibhiryajáo vidhidçîòo ya ijyate |yaîòavyameveti manaÉ samÂdhÂya sa sÂttvikaÉ ||11||

Chapter 17 391
DeefYemevOeeÙe leg Heâueb ocYeeLe&ceefhe ÛewJe Ùeled~
FpÙeles Yejleßes? leb Ùe%eb efJeefæ jepemeced~~12~~action,? he said, ?and all other business in which people are engaged
are only forms of worldly bondage, O son of Kunti, be unattached anddo your duty to the Supreme Spirit well.? In Chapter 4, then, he went onto explain the character of the unique action called yagya: that it is anact of sacrifice in which the practicer of yog offers the incoming andoutgoing breath (pran and apan) to each other and in which the two vitalwinds are regulated by offering them as oblation to the fire of self-restraint to achieve serenity of breath. There were  thus enumeratedfourteen steps of yagya, which are all but varying stages of the sameaction that bridges the gulf between individual Soul and the SupremeSpirit. In brief, yagya has been imaged as that unique process ofcontemplation which leads the worshiper to the eternal, immutable Godand ultimately effects his dissolution in that Supreme Being.
Lord Krishn again points to the same holy injunction when he lays
it down that the yagya that is decreed by scripture and the performanceof which is a duty and which restrains the mind, is the yagya of excellencewhen it is undertaken by persons who do not desire any fruit of theirendeavours.
12. ?And, O the unequalled among Bharat, be it known to you
that the yagya which is embarked upon for mere ostentation,
or even with a view to some reward, is contaminated bypassion and moral blindness.??
The one who sets about thus is versed in the precept of yagya,
but he is, in fact, unrighteous and obsessed because he performs yagya
either to flaunt his virtue and win admiration, or with the desire of securingsome profit.
Lord Krishn then points out the features of the most inferior kind
of yagya.
abhisandhÂya tu phalaØ dambhÂrthamapi caiva yat |
ijyate bharataïreîòha taØ yajáaØ viddhi rÂjasam ||12||

Yatharth Geeta 392
efJeefOenerveceme=°eVeb cev$enerveceoef#eCeced~
ßeæeefJejefnleb Ùe%eb leecemeb heefjÛe#eles~~13~~
osJeefÉpeieg®Øee%ehetpeveb  MeewÛeceepe&Jeced~yeÇÿeÛeÙe&ceefnbmee Ûe Meejerjb lehe GÛÙeles~~14~~
DevegÉsiekeâjb JeekeäÙeb melÙeb efØeÙeefnleb Ûe Ùeled~
mJeeOÙeeÙeeYÙemeveb ÛewJe Jee*ddceÙeb lehe GÛÙeles~~1513. ?Devoid of scriptural sanction and powerless to invoke the
Supreme Spirit as well as to restrain the mind, the yagya that
is engaged in without a sense of total sacrifice and faith issaid to be demoniacal??
 Unsupported by scriptural authority and incapable of generating
even food - the form in which God is manifested-and of restraining the
mind to the Self, and possessed of neither the urge to make sacredofferings-the will for total self-surrender-nor true devotion, this form ofyagya is rightly said to be of the most inferior kind. Therefore, the personwho undertakes it does not have even the faintest glimmering of trueyagya.
 Lord Krishn next remarks upon the question of penance.
14. ?Adoration of God, the twice-born, the teacher-preceptor, and
of the learned, along with having the qualities of innocence,uprightness, chastity, and disinclination to violence-are saidto be penance of the body.??
 The body ever strays towards its desires. So chastening it to
make it abide by the predisposition of the Soul is physical penance.15. ?And utterance that does not agitate but is soothing,
propitious, and truthful, and which is but an exercise in the
study of Ved, in remembrance of the Supreme Being, and inSelf-contemplation, is said to be the penance of speech.?
Articulation is also resorted to in order to give expression to
thoughts that have a leaning towards objects of sensual gratification.
vidhihÍnamasçîòÂnnaØ mantrahÍnamadakîiàam |
ïraddhÂvirahitaØ yajáaØ tÂmasaØ paricakîate ||13||
devadvijaguruprÂjáapöjanaØ ïaucamÂrjavam |brahmacaryamahiØsÂ ca ïÂrÍraØ tapa ucyate ||14||
anudvegakaraØ vÂkyaØ satyaØ priyahitaØ ca yat |
svÂdhyÂyÂbhyasanaØ caiva vÂßmayaØ tapa ucyate ||15

Chapter 17 393
Restraining it from this and steering it deliberately in the direction of
God is the penance of speech.
The last form we are apprised of is penance of the mind.
16. ?Affable temperament, tranquility, silent meditation, self-
possession, inner purity, and the like are said to be penanceof the mind.?
Simultaneous practice of the three kinds of penance - of body,
speech and mind-is the truly worthwhile penance.17. ?The threefold types of penance undergone with utmost faith
by persons with selfless action who do not desire any fruit
thereof is said to be truly righteous.?
The other kind of self-mortification is that which is indulged in by
persons whose temperament is that of rajas, or passion.18. ?And if undergone with the purpose of gaining homage,
honour, and adoration, or for mere display, penance is
unsteady and ephemeral, and is said to have the property ofrajas.?
And so we now come to the penance of the most depraved kind-
the one which is deemed evil, which is of the nature, or property, of
tamas.
19. ??The penance that is undertaken out of mere stupid
stubbornness or to hurt others is said to be diabolical.??
ceve:Øemeeo: meewcÙelJeb ceewveceelceefJeefve«en:~
YeeJemebMeggefæefjlÙesleòehees  ceevemecegÛÙeles~~16~~ßeæÙee  hejÙee  lehleb  lehemleefl$eefJeOeb  vejw:~
DeHeâueekeâe*ddef#eefYeÙeg&òewâ: meeefòJekebâ heefjÛe#eles~~17~~
melkeâejceevehetpeeLeË lehees ocYesve ÛewJe Ùeled~ef?eâÙeles leefon Øeesòebâ jepemeb ÛeueceOeÇgJeced~~18~~
cet{«eensCeelcevees Ùelheer[Ùee ef?eâÙeles lehe:~
hejmÙeeslmeeoveeLeË Jee leòeecemecegoeùleced~~19~~manaÉprasÂdaÉ saumyatvaØ maunamÂtmavinigrahaÉ |
bhÂvasaØïuddhirityetattapo mÂnasamucyate ||16||ïraddhayÂ parayÂ taptaØ tapastattrividhaØ naraiÉ |
aphalÂkÂßkîibhiryuktaiÉ sÂttvikaØ paricakîate ||17||
satkÂramÂnapöjÂrthaØ tapo dambhena caiva yat |kriyate tadiha proktaØ rÂjasaØ calamadhruvam ||18||
möÅhagrÂheàÂtmano yatpÍÅayÂ kriyate tapaÉ |
parasyotsÂdanÂrthaØ vÂ tattÂmasamudÂhçtam ||19||

Yatharth Geeta 394
oeleJÙeefceefle  Ùeöeveb  oerÙelesÓveghekeâeefjCes~
osMes keâeues Ûe hee$es Ûe leöeveb meeefòJekebâ mce=leced~~20
Ùeòeg ØelÙeghekeâejeLeË HeâuecegeföMÙe Jee hegve:~
oerÙeles Ûe heefjefkeäue°b leöeveb jepemeb mce=leced~~21DeosMekeâeues Ùeöevecehee$esYÙe§e oerÙeles~
Demelke=âleceJe%eeleb leòeecemecegoeùleced~~22~~Thus, as we have seen, the purpose of penance that is good and
virtuous is to mould the body, mind, and speech in harmony with the
cherished end. The mode of impulsive penance is similar, but it is takenup with the vainglorious desire for worldly honour. Sometimes evenexceptional souls who have renounced the world fall prey to this infirmity.The third kind of penance, that which is called demoniacal, is not onlydone wrongfully but also with the malicious intention of causing harm toothers.
 Lord Krishn next takes up the question of alms.
20. ?And the alms that are given to the right person at the right
place and time, and in the spirit that charity is a boundenduty done without any expectation, are said to be good.??
21. ?And alms which are offered grudgingly and for a good turn
in exchange, or with some recompense in view, is said to beimpulsive and morally improper.??
However, charity that is grievous because it is done under coercion,
or with expectation of some favour or reward, is of the impassioned
kind.
22. ?And the alms which are dispensed without deference or
contemptuously to unworthy recipients at an inappropriate
place and time are said to be diabolical.?
The basest kind of gifts are, however, those that are offered with
disrespect and scorn to the undeserving at an inopportune place and
time.
dÂtavyamiti yaddÂnaØ dÍyate?nupakÂriàe |
deïe kÂle ca pÂtre ca taddÂnaØ sÂttvikaØ smçtam ||20
yattu pratyupakÂrÂrthaØ phalamuddiïya vÂ punaÉ |
dÍyate ca parikliîòaØ taddÂnaØ rÂjasaØ smçtam ||21adeïakÂle yaddÂnamapÂtrebhyaïca dÍyate |
asatkçtamavajáÂtaØ tattÂmasamudÂhçtam ||22||

Chapter 17 395
The Revered Maharaj Ji would always tell us, ?Bear it in mind that
the donor is wrecked if he gives alms to the undeserving.? Similar to
this is Lord Krishn?s observation that charity is worthwhile only if it isdirected, at a suitable place and time, at the meritorious with truegenerosity and without any desire for a reciprocal favour. Gifts that areoffered reluctantly and with an eye on some profit in return are morallyflawed, while alms that are given irreverently and with scorn to theundeserving are positively evil. Though generically they are all gifts,alms-giving by persons who renounce their desires, home, and all, andplace their trust in God alone, is of a higher order, for charity of this kindimplies a total surrender by a mind that has been purged of all cravings.Lord Krishn approves of this form of charity as an indispensablenecessity.
Lord Krishn at last enlightens Arjun on the significance of OM,
Tat, and Sat.
23. ?Om, Tat, and Sat are three epithets used for the Supreme
Being from whom at the outset there came forth the Brahmin,
Ved, and Yagya.??
Lord Krishn tells Arjun on how the three names Om, Tat, and Sat,
symbolizing God, direct us to the Supreme Being and call him to mind.
It is he who, at the beginning, created the Brahmin, the Ved, and yagya.That is to say that Brahmin, the Ved, and yagya are all born from OM,the symbol of Brahm. Thus it could also be said that they have allensued from yog. They are generated only by ceaseless contemplationof OM, and other than this there is no way.
24. ?It is hence that the deeds of yagya, charity, and penance, as
ordained by scripture, are always initiated by the devotees of
Ved with a resonant utterance of the syllable OM.??
Ô lelmeefoefle efveoxMees yeÇÿeCeef?eefJeOe: mce=le:~
yeÇeÿeCeemlesve Jesoe§e Ùe%ee§e efJeefnlee: hegje~~23~~
lemceeoesefcelÙegoeùlÙe Ùe%eoevelehe:ef?eâÙee:~
ØeJele&vles efJeOeeveesòeâe: meleleb yeÇÿeJeeefoveeced~~24~~
oØ tatsaditi nirdeïo brahmaàastrividhaÉ smritaÉ |
brÂhmaàÂstena vedÂïca yajáÂïca vihitÂÉ purÂ ||23||
tasmÂdomityudÂhçtya yajáadÂnatapaÉkriyÂÉ |
pravartante vidhÂnoktÂÉ satataØ brahmavÂdinÂm ||24||

Yatharth Geeta 396
It is owing to this that performance of the ordained worship,
benevolence and penance by persons who concern themselves with
God ever commences with an articulation of the sacred OM, for thisutterance reminds one of that Supreme Being.
Lord Krishn then elaborates the meaning and use of Tat.
25. ?Stripped of desire for any reward and holding that God is all
pervading, persons who aspire to the ultimate bliss embarkon the tasks of yagya, penance, and charity as ordained byscripture.??
Tat denotes surrender to God. Stated differently, one has to recite
OM and take up the accomplishment of yagya, alms-giving, and penance
with absolute trust in Tat, i.e., that God.
Lord Krishn next elucidates the meaning and use of Sat.
26. ?Sat is employed to express the ideas of truth and excellence,
and, O Parth, the word is also used to denote a propitiousact.?
At the beginning of the Geeta, Arjun held forth that family traditions
alone were permanent and real. That provoked Lord Krishn to ask him
how he had become a victim of such a deluded notion. That which isreal is never absent at any time and it cannot be annihilated, whereasthat which is unreal has no existence at any time, and it cannot beotherwise. Now what is that which never has a being? Lord Krishnaffirmed while resolving these questions that the Self alone is real andalso that the bodies of all living beings are perishable. The Self is eternal,imperceptible, permanent, and immortal. This is the paramount truth.
Lord Krishn remarks that this epithet of the Supreme Being, viz.
Sat, refers to truth and thus to the sense of perfection. Arjun is further
leefolÙeveefYemevOeeÙe  Heâueb  Ùe%elehe:ef?eâÙee:~
oeveef?eâÙee§e efJeefJeOee: ef?eâÙevles cees#ekeâe*ddef#eefYe:~~25
meÆeJes meeOegYeeJes Ûe meefolÙeslelØeÙegpÙeles~ØeMemles keâce&efCe leLee meÛÚyo: heeLe& ÙegpÙeles~~26
tadityanabhisandhÂya phalaØ yajáatapaÉkriyÂÉ |
dÂnakriyÂïca vividhÂÉ kriyante mokîakÂßkîibhiÉ ||25
sadbhÂve sÂdhubhÂve ca sadityetatprayujyate |praïaste karmaài tathÂ sacchabdaÉ pÂrtha yujyate ||26

Chapter 17 397
Ùe%es leheefme oeves Ûe efmLeefle: meefoefle ÛeesÛÙeles~
keâce&  ÛewJe  leoLeeaÙeb  meefolÙesJeeefYeOeerÙeles~~27~~
DeßeæÙee ngleb oòeb lehemlehleb ke=âleb Ûe Ùeled~DemeefolÙegÛÙeles heeLe& ve Ûe lelØeslÙe vees Fn~~28~~told that the expression Sat is employed when the commencement of
the undertaken task is complete in every respect and well under way.Sat by no means implies that all these objects are ours. How can thingsour physical bodies make use of belong to us when we are not mastersof even our own persons? The application of sat is ever aimed in thesame direction-of faith in the verity that the Self is the most sublimereality. The word sat is used when there is firm belief in this truth, whenthere is a hankering after perfection to realize this truth, and when theaction that effects this realization begins to get along well. On the samesubject of reality the Yogeshwar speaks again.
27. ?And it is said that the condition inherent in yagya, penance,
and charity, as well as the endeavour to attain to God, is also
real.??
Only action that is entered upon for the attainment of God is real;
and yagya, alms-giving, and atonement are but complements to this
undertaking. Finally, Lord Krishn affirms decisively that faith is anessential requisite of all these undertakings.
28. ?Therefore, O Parth, is it said that, devoid of faith, the oblation
and alms that are offered and the penance that is suffered, as
well as all other similar ventures, are all false, for they cando us good neither in this world nor in the next.??
All that is done without genuine trust and reverence-whether
sacrifice or charity or self-mortification by way of contrition-is unreal.
This is said, for such deeds are beneficial neither in this life nor afterdeath. Faith combined with self-surrender is, therefore, a crucialnecessity.
yajáe tapasi dÂne ca sthitiÉ saditi cocyate |
karma caiva tadarthÍyaØ sadityevÂbhidhÍyate ||27||
aïraddhayÂ hutaØ dattaØ tapastaptaØ kçtaØ ca yat |asadityucyate pÂrtha na ca tatpretya no iha ||28||

Yatharth Geeta 398
???????????????
At the beginning of the chapter, Arjun wishes to be instructed by
the Lord on the nature of the faith of men who set upon the task of
worship in violation of scriptural injunction. Who among us does notknow the many who persist in adoring ghosts and spirits? What is thenature of their faith? Is it moral, impulsive, or steeped in ignorance andtherefore evil? Lord Krishn?s answer to the question is that since faith isinherent in man, he cannot but believe in something here or there. Sohe is shaped by his learning and faith. Determined respectively byproperties of sattwa, rajas and tamas, faith is of three kinds. While menwith righteous faith adore gods and men of illusion are devotees ofyaksh (source of renown and valour) and demons (personification ofwealth and brutish conduct), the ignorant venerate ghosts and spirits.By their various forms of worship that are lacking in spiritual approval,all such devotees not only impair the elements that they embody butalso their finer resolutions and the God that dwell within them. Theseadulators of supernatural spirits, yaksh, demons, and diverse godsshould indeed be looked upon as disposed to evil rather than as trueworshipers.
It is for the third time now that Lord Krishn has broached the
subject of gods. He told Arjun, first in Chapter 7, that only misguidedmen who have been robbed of their discernment by lust worship gods.Reverting to the problem in Chapter 9, he asserted that even worshipersof the many gods really worship him-the one eternal, immutable God.However since the practice is contrary to scriptural provision, this worshipof theirs is but futile. And now here, in Chapter 17, Lord Krishn classifiesthese worshipers as the most debased, for the only form of reverencecountenanced by him is the worship of the one God.
Subsequently Yogeshwar Krishn deals with four vital issues, of
food, yagya, atonement, and alms-giving. Food is said to be of threecategories. Men who are endowed with moral virtue relish food that isnutritious, naturally pleasing, and soothing. Men who are given to passionand moral confusion are fond of dishes that are pungent, hot, tantalizing,

Chapter 17 399
and injurious to health. And ignorant men with a wicked leaning hanker
after stale and unclean fare.
If taken up and accomplished in the way provided by scripture,
yagya - internal meditative exercises that subdue the mind and is freefrom desire is morally worthwhile. Yagya that is performed to flauntoneself and as just a venture for the gratification of some desire ismorally reprehensible. The lowest of all, however, is yagya that is rightlycalled evil, for it is divested of scriptural sanction and embarked onwithout incantation of sacred (Vedic) hymns, spirit of sacrifice, and truededication.
Reverent service to a teacher-preceptor, who has all the virtues
that can provide access to the Supreme God, and sincere contritionthat observes the principles of non-injury, continence, and purityconstitute penance of the body. Speaking that which is true, agreeable,and benign is the penance of speech. Bringing the mind to bear uponthe required action and holding it in a state of silent meditation on thecherished goal alone and nothing else is penance of the mind. But thepenance that is complete and perfect in all respects is that which involvesthe mind, speech, and body all.
Alms given reverentially out of a sense of moral obligation and
with a due regard for suitable place and time as well as for worthinessof the recipient are good. But alms given with reluctance and hope ofsome consequent profit are an outcome of passion, while alms givenwith disdain to an undeserving beneficiary are caused by ignorance.
Identifying the character of OM, Tat and Sat, Lord Krishn says
that these names awaken memories of God. OM is intoned at theinitiation of penance, charity, and yagya that are in keeping with theway prescribed by scripture; and the sacred sound stays with the seekeruntil the consummation of his enterprise. Tat signifies the yonder God.The ordained action can be accomplished only with a sense of totalresignation and Sat manifests itself only when the venture has got wellunder way. Worship of God alone is reality. Sat is put to use when thedevotee is convinced of the truth and possessed by a craving for

Yatharth Geeta 400
perfection. Sat is relevant, too, to the final conclusion of the action,
comprising yagya, charity, and penance, that is capable of taking oneto God. The deeds that provide access to God are doubtlessly real. Butalong with all these, faith is a prime necessity. Undertaken withoutfaith, the action that is accomplished, the alms that are given, and thefire of penance in which the worshiper has burnt himself-are all in vain,profitless both in the present life and in the lives to come. Faith is thusimperative.
Thus, through the whole chapter, light is shed on faith; and in its
concluding part there is attempted-for the first time in the Geeta-a detailedelucidation of OM, Tat and Sat.
Thus concludes the Seventeenth Chapter, in the Upanishad of
Shreemadbhagwadgeeta, on the Knowledge of the Supreme
Spirit, the Science of Yog, and the Dialogue between
?Lord Krishn and Arjun? entitled.
??OM Tatsat Shraddhatraya Vibhag Yog??
or
??The Yog of Three-fold Faith??.
Thus concludes the Most Revered Paramhans Paramanand Ji?s
disciple Swami Adgadanand?s exposition of the Seventeenth
Chapter of the Shreemadbhagwadgeeta in ??Yatharth Geeta??,
entitled: ??OM Tatsat Shraddhatraya Vibhag Yog??.
HARI OM TAT SAT

Chapter 18 401
CHAPTER 18
THE YOG
OF RENUNCIATION
This is the last chapter of the Geeta, the first half of which is
devoted to the resolution of several questions posed by Arjun, whereas
the latter half is the conclusion which dwells upon the many blessingsthat flow from the sacred work. Chapter 17 classified and elucidatedfood, penance, yagya, charity, and faith. In the same context, however,the different forms of renunciation (sanyas) have yet not been touchedupon. What is the motive for whatever man does? Who is the motivator-God or nature? The question was raised earlier, but the present chapteragain sheds light on it. Likewise, the subject of the ?quadritype? divisionof men was broached earlier, but the present chapter again takes it upand closely analyzes its character within the framework of nature. Then,at the end, numerous advantages that ensue from the Geeta areilluminated.
After having listened to Lord Krishn?s categorization of various
subjects in the previous chapter, Arjun now also desires to be enlightenedon the different forms of renunciation (sanyas) and relinquishment (tyag).
1. ?Arjun said, ?l am curious to learn, O the mighty armed, O
Hrishikesh, master of the senses and slayer of demons  the
principles of relinquishment and of renunciation.? ??
Total abandonment is renunciation, a state in which even will and
merits of action cease to be, and prior to which there is only endless
giving up of attachment for fulfillment of the spiritual quest. There are
Depeg&ve GJeeÛe-
meVÙeememÙe ceneyeenes leòJeefceÛÚeefce Jesefolegced~
lÙeeiemÙe  Ûe  ù<eerkesâMe  he=LekeäkesâefMeefve<etove~~1~~arjuna uvÂca-
sannyÂsasya mahÂbÂho tattvamicchÂmi veditum |
tyÂgasya ca hçîÍkeïa pçthakkeïiniîödana ||1||

Yatharth Geeta 402
ßeerYeieJeevegJeeÛe-
keâecÙeeveeb keâce&Ceeb vÙeemeb meVÙeemeb keâJeÙees efJeog:~meJe&keâce&HeâuelÙeeieb ØeengmlÙeeieb efJeÛe#eCee:~~2~~lÙeepÙeb oes<eJeefolÙeskesâ keâce& Øeengce&veeref<eCe:~Ùe%eoevelehe:keâce& ve lÙeepÙeefceefle Ûeehejs~~3~~
efve§eÙeb  ëe=Ceg  ces  le$e  lÙeeies  Yejlemeòece~
lÙeeiees efn heg®<eJÙeeIeÇ ef$eefJeOe: mecØekeâerefle&le:~~4~~Ùe%eoevelehe:keâce& ve lÙeepÙeb keâeÙe&cesJe leled~Ùe%ees oeveb lehe§ewJe heeJeveeefve ceveeref<eCeeced~~5~~two questions here: Arjun wants to know the essence of renunciation
as well as the essence of relinquishment. Thereupon Yogeshwar Krishnsays:
2. ??The Lord said, ?Whereas numerous scholars use
renunciation for the giving up of covered deeds many others
of mature judgement use relinquishment to name theabnegation of the fruits of all action.???
3. ?While many erudite men insist that since all actions are vile
they ought to be forsaken, other scholars proclaim that deedssuch as yagya, charity, and penance ought not to beforsaken.??
 After thus submitting varied opinions on the problem, the
Yogeshwar advances his own definitive view.4. ?Listen, O the best of Bharat, to my notion of renunciation
and of how, O the unmatched among men, this renunciation
is said to be of three kinds.?
5. ?Rather than forsaking them, deeds such as yagya, charity,
and penance ought certainly to be undertaken as a duty, foryagya, charity, and penance are deeds that redeem men ofwisdom.?
Lord Krishn has thus submitted four prevalent thoughts. First,
that coveted deeds should be foresworn. Second, that the fruits of all
action should be given up. Third, that all actions should be relinquished,for they are all blemished. And fourth, that it is wrong to forego yagya,
ïrÍbhagavÂnuvÂca-
kÂmyÂnÂØ karmaàÂØ nyÂsaØ sannyÂsaØ kavayo viduÉ |sarvakarmaphalatyÂgaØ prÂhustyÂgaØ vicakîaàÂÉ ||2||tyÂjyaØ doîavadityeke karma prÂhurmanÍîiàaÉ |yajáadÂnatapaÉkarma na tyÂjyamiti cÂpare ||3||
niïcayaØ ïçàu me tatra tyÂge bharatasattama |
tyÂgo hi puruîavyÂghra trividhaÉ samprakÍrtitaÉ ||4||yajáadÂnatapaÉkarma na tyÂjyaØ kÂryameva tat |yajáo dÂnaØ tapaïcaiva pÂvanÂni manÍîiàÂm ||5||

Chapter 18 403
SleevÙeefhe leg keâcee&efCe meÁb lÙekeälJee Heâueeefve Ûe~
keâle&JÙeeveerefle ces heeLe& efveef§elebb celecegòececed~~6~~efveÙelemÙe leg meVÙeeme: keâce&Cees veesheheÅeles~
ceesneòemÙe heefjlÙeeiemleeceme: heefjkeâerefle&le:~~7~~charity, and penance. Expressing his accord with one of these thoughts,
Lord Krishn says that it is also his conclusive view that yagya, charityand penance are not to be forsaken. This illustrates how divergent viewson the question were current at Lord Krishn?s time, too, out of which,one was true. Even today there are many views. When a sage makeshis advent in the world he isolates and puts forward that which is themost salutary among the many varying doctrines. All great Souls havedone this and Lord Krishn has done the same. Instead of advocating anew way he only supports and expounds that which is true among manyaccepted views.
6. ?It is my considered belief, O Parth, that these deeds as also
all others ought certainly to be accomplished after forsaking
attachment and desire for the fruits of labour.??
Replying to Arjun?s question, Lord Krishn then examines
relinquishment.7. ?And, since the requisite action ought not to be abandoned,
forsaking it out of some misconception is deemed as
renunciation of the nature of ignorance (tamas).?
According to Lord Krishn the ordained, essential action is only
one-the performance of yagya. The Yogeshwar has reverted to and
stressed the ordained mode time and again, lest the seeker shoulddeviate from the right path. And now he declares that it is improper toabandon this ordained action. Forsaking it out of some delusion is thussaid to be relinquishment of the diabolical kind (that is, of the nature oftamas). The deed that ought to be done and the ordained  action are thesame, and giving it up out of involvement in objects of sensual pleasureis morally, improper, The man who abandons such action is doomed to
etÂnyapi tu karmÂài saßgaØ tyaktvÂ phalÂni ca |
kartavyÂnÍti me pÂrtha niïcitaØ matamuttamam ||6||niyatasya tu sannyÂsaÉ karmaào nopapadyate |
mohÂttasya parityÂgastÂmasaÉ parikÍrtitaÉ ||7||

Yatharth Geeta 404
og:KeefcelÙesJe Ùelkeâce& keâeÙekeäuesMeYeÙeeòÙepesled~
me ke=âlJee jepemeb lÙeeieb vewJe lÙeeieHeâueb ueYesled~~8~~keâeÙe&efcelÙesJe  Ùelkeâce&  efveÙeleb  ef?eâÙelesÓpeg&ve~
meÁb lÙekeälJee Heâueb ÛewJe me lÙeeie: meeefòJekeâes cele:~~9
ve És°?ekegâMeueb keâce& kegâMeues veeveg<eppeles~lÙeeieer meòJemeceeefJe°es cesOeeJeer efÚVemebMeÙe:~~10~~rebirth in low forms, for he has suppressed the impulse for divine
adoration.
Lord Krishn next speaks about relinquishment that is tainted by
passion and moral blindness (rajas).
8. ?He who rashly foregoes action under the assumption that
all of it is grievous, or out of fear of physical suffering, is
deprived of the merits of his relinquishment.??
 One who is incapable of worship and who casts off action because
of his apprehension of physical pain is reckless and morally in error,
and his relinquishment-of the nature of passion (rajas)- fails to bringhim the ultimate repose of mind that should be the end of relinquishment.
9. ?Only that relinquishment is esteemed righteous, O Arjun,
which is ordained and practiced with the conviction that doing
it after having forsaken attachment and fruits of labour is amoral commitment.?
 So only the ordained deed is to be done and all else has to be
discarded. However, shall we go on doing it endlessly or will there be a
point when it too is given up? Speaking of this, Lord Krishn now pointsout the way of relinquishment that is good and worthwhile.
10. ?Gifted with flawless moral excellence and freedom from
doubt, one who neither abhors deeds that are unpropitious
nor is enamoured of those that are propitious is wise andself-denying.?
Only the action prescribed by scripture is auspicious and all that
is opposed to it is mere bondage of this mortal world and therefore
duÉkhamityeva yatkarma kÂyakleïabhayÂttyajet |
sa kçtvÂ rÂjasaØ tyÂgaØ naiva tyÂgaphalaØ labhet||8kÂryamityeva yatkarma niyataØ kriyate'rjuna |
saßgaØ tyaktvÂ phalaØ caiva sa tyÂgaÉ sÂttviko mataÉ||9
na dveîòyakuïalaØ karma kuïale nÂnuîajjate |tyÂgÍ sattvasamÂviîòo medhÂvÍ chinnasaØïayaÉ ||10||

Chapter 18 405
ve efn osnYe=lee MekeäÙeb lÙeòegbâ keâcee&CÙeMes<ele:~
Ùemleg keâce&HeâuelÙeeieer me lÙeeieerlÙeefYeOeerÙeles~~11~~
Deefve°efce°b efceßeb Ûe ef$eefJeOeb keâce&Ce: Heâueced~YeJelÙelÙeeefieveeb ØeslÙe ve leg meVÙeeefmeveeb keäJeefÛeled~~12inauspicious. The person of equanimity, who neither loathes what is
inauspicious nor is attached to that which is auspicious, because forsuch a person even that which had to be done has at last come to anend, is imbued with righteousness, emancipated from doubt, anddiscerning. So such a person is enabled to disown all. This totalrelinquishment, coming along with accomplishment, is renunciation. Isthere, we might be tempted to ask, any easier way? Lord Krishncategorically denies the possibility.
11. ?Since the abandonment of all action by an embodied being
is impossible, the one who has given up the fruits of action
is credited with having practiced relinquishment.??
?Embodied beings? does not imply only gross, visible bodies.
According to Lord Krishn the three properties of virtue (sattwa), passion
(rajas), and ignorance (tamas), born out of nature, imprison the Soulwithin the body. The Soul is embodied only as long as these propertiesremain. So long he will have to pass from one body to another, for theproperties that beget the body are still in existence. Since an embodiedSoul cannot eschew all action, it is said that one who has given up thefruits of action has mastered renunciation. Hence it is that it is imperativeto do the prescribed deed and renounce its fruits so long as the propertiesthat make the body remain. If, on the other hand, actions are undertakenwith some desire or the other, they do bear fruits.
12. ?Whereas the triple returns-good, bad, and mixed-of covetous
people?s  actions, issue forth even after death, the actions of
people who have renounced all, do not ever bear any fruits.??
 The deeds of avaricious men produce consequences that arise
even after death. These consequences indeed persist through endless
na hi dehabhçtÂ ïakyaØ tyaktuØ karmÂàyaïeîataÉ |
yastu karmaphalatyÂgÍ sa tyÂgÍtyabhidhÍyate ||11||
aniîòamiîòaØ miïraØ ca trividhaØ karmaàaÉ phalam |bhavatyatyÂginÂØ pretya na tu sannyÂsinÂØ kvacit ||12

Yatharth Geeta 406
heÃewleeefve  ceneyeenes  keâejCeeefve  efveyeesOe  ces~
mee*ddKÙes ke=âleevles Øeesòeâeefve efmeæÙes meJe&keâce&Ceeced~~13
DeefOe?eveb leLee keâlee& keâjCeb Ûe he=LeefiJeOeced~
efJeefJeOee§e he=LekeäÛes°e owJeb ÛewJee$e heÃececed~~14~~MejerjJee*ddceveesefYeÙe&lkeâce&  ØeejYeles  vej:~
vÙeeÙÙeb Jee efJehejerleb Jee heÃewles lemÙe nsleJe:~~15~~births. But the actions of those who have relinquished all-of true sanyasi
(so called because they have given up all their possessions)-do notbear fruits at any time. This is complete renunciation the highest stageof spiritual seeking.
The examination of the outcome of good and bad deeds, and of
their ceasing at the point where all desire is annihilated, is thusconcluded. Lord Krishn then takes up the causes that effect righteousand unrighteous actions.
13. ?Learn well from me, O the mighty-armed, the five principles
that Sankhya  acknowledges as accomplishers of all action.?
14. ?In respect of this, there are the prime mover, the several
agents, the varied endeavours, the sustaining power, and
likewise the fifth means that is providence.??
   The mind is the doer. Virtuous and evil inclinations are the
agents. Performance of righteous action demands a predisposition to
discernment, non-attachment, tranquility, self-restraint, sacrifice, andconstant meditation. But lust, anger, infatuation, aversion, and avariceare the agents that effect unrighteous deeds. There are then the manifoldefforts-the endless desires-and the means. That  aspiration begins tobe fulfilled which is supported by means. And last of all there is the fifthprinciple, providence or sanskar-the outcome of all that has happenedto the Soul in the past. This is borne out by Lord Krishn.
15. ??These are the five causes of whatever action a man
accomplishes with his mind, speech, and body, either in
accordance with or even in contravention of scripture.?
paácaitÂni mahÂbÂho kÂraàÂni nibodha me |
sÂßkhye kçtÂnte proktÂni siddhaye sarvakarmaàÂm||13
adhiîòhÂnaØ tathÂ kartÂ karaàaØ ca pçthagvidham |
vividhÂïca pçthakceïòÂ daivaØ caivÂtra paácamam||14ïarÍravÂßmanobhiryatkarma prÂrabhate naraÉ |
nyÂyyaØ vÂ viparÍtaØ vÂ paácaite tasya hetavaÉ ||15||

Chapter 18 407
le$ewJeb meefle keâlee&jceelceeveb kesâJeueb leg Ùe:~
heMÙelÙeke=âleyegefælJeeVe me heMÙeefle ogce&efle:~~16~~
ÙemÙe veen*ddke=âlees YeeJees yegefæÙe&mÙe ve efuehÙeles~nlJeeefhe me FceeBuueeskeâeVe nefvle ve efveyeOÙeles~~17~~16. ?Despite this, however he who-out of his immature judgement-
views the consummate, detached Self as the doer is dull-
minded and he sees not.??
 As the Soul is identical with God, the pronouncement also implies
that God does not act.
 This is the second time that the Yogeshwar has stressed the
point. He said in Chapter 5 that God neither acts himself nor impels
others to act, nor does he bring about even the association of actions.Then why do we say that everything is done by God? It is only becauseour minds are clouded by delusion. We just say whatever comes to ourmind. However, as Lord Krishn has affirmed, there are five causes ofaction. Yet the ignorant man, incapable of perceiving the reality, viewsthe lone, Godlike Soul as the doer. He fails to realize that God does notperform any deed. Paradoxically, however, while saying all this, LordKrishn also girds up his loins for Arjun and assures him that he has justto play the part of an instrument, for he (Lord Krishn) is the real doer-arbiter. What after all is the sage?s import?
 In truth, there is a line of gravity that separates God from nature.
So long as the seeker is within the boundaries of nature, of the threeproperties, God does not act. While abiding close by the worshiper, heis yet only an onlooker. But when the seeker gets  hold of the cherishedgoal with firm intentness, God begins to regulate his inner life. Theseeker then breaks free from the gravity of nature and enters the realmof God. God ever stands by such a seeker. But he acts only for aworshiper such as this. So let us always meditate on him.
17. ??Though he may slay, the man who is liberated from conceit
and whose mind is unsullied is neither a killer nor bound by
his action.?
tatraivaØ sati kartÂramÂtmÂnaØ kevalaØ tu yaÉ |
païyatyakçtabuddhitvÂnna sa païyati durmatiÉ ||16||
yasya nÂhaßkçto bhÂvo buddhiryasya na lipyate |hatvÂpi sa imÂllokÂnna hanti na nibadhyate ||17||

Yatharth Geeta 408
%eeveb %esÙeb heefj%eelee ef$eefJeOee keâce&Ûeesovee~
keâjCeb keâce& keâlexefle ef$eefJeOe: keâce&me*dd«en:~~18~~He who does not harbour the feeling that he is the 'doer' and he
whose mind is free from attachments, despite annihilating all the worlds,
neither kills nor gets bound by it. The dissolution of the sanskars
(impressions accumulated through previous existences) related withthe physical world is the annihilation of the world. How that ordained
action gets spurred is as follows:
18. ?Whereas the way of securing knowledge, the worthwhile
knowledge, and the knower constitute the threefold inspiration
to action, the doer, the agents, and the action itself are the
threefold constituents of action.??
 Arjun is told that the impetus to action is derived from all-knowing
seers, the mode of acquiring knowledge, and the object that is worthy
of being acquired. Lord Krishn has said earlier that he is the objectworth knowing. The stimulus to action is derived only when there is a
realized sage with perfect knowledge who can initiate  the seeker into
the way by which the desired knowledge can be obtained, and when theseeker?s eyes are fixed on his goal. Similarly, the store of action beginsto grow by the coming together of the doer-dedication of mind, agents
such as wisdom, disinterest in the material world, repose, and self-
restraint by which the action is accomplished, and awareness of theaction. It has been pointed out earlier that neither does the undertaking
of action by the seeker after accomplishment have any purpose, nor is
there any loss even in its abandonment. Yet he engages in action eventhen for the generation of virtuous powers in the hearts of those who are
left behind. This is effected by the confluence of the doer, the agents,
and the action itself.
Knowledge, action, and the doer are also each of three kinds.
jáÂnaØ jáeyaØ parijáÂtÂ trividhÂ karmacodanÂ |
karaàaØ karma karteti trividhaÉ karmasaßgrahaÉ ||18||

Chapter 18 409
%eeveb keâce& Ûe keâlee& Ûe ef$eOewJe iegCeYesole:~
ØeesÛÙeles iegCeme*ddKÙeeves ÙeLeeJeÛÚ=Ceg leevÙeefhe~~19~~meJe&Yetles<eg   Ùesvewkebâ   YeeJeceJÙeÙeceer#eles~
DeefJeYeòebâ efJeYeòesâ<eg lep%eeveb efJeefæ meeefòJekeâced~~20~~
he=LekeälJesve leg Ùep%eeveb veeveeYeeJeevhe=LeefiJeOeeved~Jesefòe meJex<eg Yetles<eg lep%eeveb efJeefæ jepemeced~~21~~
Ùeòeg ke=âlmveJeoskeâefmcevkeâeÙex meòeâcenwlegkeâced~
DeleòJeeLe&Jeouheb Ûe leòeecemecegoeùleced~~22~~19. ?Listen to me well on how even knowledge and action and
the doer have been graded into three kinds each, in the
Sankhya philosophy of properties (gun).??
The next verse throws light upon the character of virtuous
knowledge.
20. ?Know that knowledge as immaculate (sattwik) by which one
perceives the reality of the indestructible God as an undivided
entity in all divided beings.??
Such knowledge is direct perception, with which the properties of
nature come to an end. It marks the culmination of awareness. Let us
now see knowledge of the second (rajas) kind.
21. ?Know that knowledge as tainted by passion by which one
perceives divided entities in all separate beings.??
22. ?And know that knowledge as besmirched by ignorance
(tamas) which adheres to the body alone as if it were the
whole truth, and which is irrational, unfounded on truth, andpetty.??
 Devoid of wisdom and the required discipline to buttress it, this
kind of knowledge is worthless as it takes one away from awareness of
God who is the one and only reality.
The following verses then recount the three kinds of action.
jáÂnaØ karma ca kartÂ ca tridhaiva guàabhedataÉ |
procyate guàasaßkhyÂne yathÂvacchçàu tÂnyapi ||19||sarvabhöteîu yenaikaØ bhÂvamavyayamÍkîate |
avibhaktaØ vibhakteîu tajjáÂnaØ viddhi sÂttvikam ||20||
pçthaktvena tu yajjáÂnaØ nÂnÂbhÂvÂnpçthagvidhÂn |vetti sarveîu bhöteîu tajjáÂnaØ viddhi rÂjasam ||21||
yattu kçtsnavadekasminkÂrye saktamahaitukam |
atattvÂrthavadalpaØ ca tattÂmasamudÂhçtam ||22||

Yatharth Geeta 410
efveÙeleb  meÁjefnlecejeieÉs<ele:  ke=âleced~
DeHeâueØeshmegvee keâce& ÙeòelmeeefòJekeâcegÛÙeles~~23~~
Ùeòeg keâeceshmegvee keâce& meen¿ejsCe Jee hegve:~ef?eâÙeles yengueeÙeemeb leõepemecegoeùleced~~24~~
DevegyevOeb #eÙeb efnbmeeceveJes#Ùe Ûe heew®<eced~
ceesneoejYÙeles keâce& ÙeòeòeecemecegÛÙeles~~25~~cegòeâmeÁesÓvenbJeeoer   Oe=lÙeglmeenmeceefvJele:~
efmeæ?eefmeæ?eesefve&efJe&keâej: keâlee& meeefòJekeâ GÛÙeles~~26~~23. ?That action is said to be immaculate which is ordained and
embarked on with detachment, by one who is free from
infatuation as well as loathing, and who does not aspire to
any reward.??
 The ordained action is none other than worship and meditation
that lead the Soul to God.24. ?And that action is said to be of the nature of passion which
is strenuous and entered upon by one who covets rewards
and is egotistic.??
 This seeker also performs the ordained action, but what a great
difference is made by the fact that he is desirous of rewards and
possessed of vanity? So the action undertaken by him bears the
character of moral blindness.
25. ??That action is said to be unenlightened which is taken up
out of sheer ignorance and with disregard for outcome, loss
to oneself, and injury to others, as well as for one?s own
competence.??
 Such action is bound to be reduced to nothingness at last and it
is unquestionably not approved by scripture. Rather than action it is
mere delusion.
 Let us now see the attributes of the doer.
26. ?That doer is said to be of immaculate nature who is free
from attachment, who does not indulge in arrogant speech,and who is endowed with patience and vigour as well as
unswayed by success and failure.??
niyataØ saßgarahitamarÂgadveîataÉ kçtam |
aphalaprepsunÂ karma yattatsÂttvikamucyate ||23||
yattu kÂmepsunÂ karma sÂhaßkÂreàa vÂ punaÉ |kriyate bahulÂyÂsaØ tadrÂjasamudÂhçtam ||24||
anubandhaØ kîayaØ hiØsÂmanapekîya ca pauruîam |
mohÂdÂrabhyate karma yattattÂmasamucyate ||25||muktasaßgo'nahaØvÂdÍ dhçtyutsÂhasamanvitaÉ |
siddhyasiddhyornirvikÂraÉ kartÂ sÂttvika ucyate ||26||

Chapter 18 411
jeieer keâce&HeâueØeshmegueg&yOees efnbmeelcekeâesÓMegefÛe:~
n<e&MeeskeâeefvJele: keâlee& jepeme: heefjkeâerefle&le:~~27~~DeÙegòeâ: Øeeke=âle: mleyOe: Me"es vew<ke=âeflekeâesÓueme:~
efJe<eeoer oerIe&met$eer Ûe keâlee& leeceme GÛÙeles~~28~~
yegæsYexob Oe=les§ewJe iegCeleef?eefJeOeb ëe=Ceg~ØeesÛÙeceeveceMes<esCe he=LekeälJesve OeveÀeÙe~~29~~
ØeJe=efòeb  Ûe  efveJe=efòeb  Ûe  keâeÙee&keâeÙex  YeÙeeYeÙes~
yevOeb cees#eb Ûe Ùee Jesefòe yegefæ: mee heeLe& meeefòJekeâer~~30 These are the attributes of the righteous doer and the action he
undertakes is, of course, the same ordained action.
27. ??That doer is said to be of the attribute of passion who Is
impulsive, covetous of the fruits of action, acquisitive,
pernicious, vitiated, and subject to joy and sorrow.??
28. ?That doer is said to be of the attribute of ignorance who is
fickle, uncouth, vain, devious, spiteful, dispirited, lazy, andprocrastinating.??
These are the attributes of the ignorant doer. The scrutiny of the
qualities of doers is concluded at this point and Yogeshwar Krishn now
embarks on an examination of the attributes of judgement (intellect),resolve, (steadfastness) and felicity (happiness).
29. ?Listen to me, too, O Dhananjay, on the three-fold
classification according to the properties  of nature as I make
them exhaustively and respectively, of intellect, steadfastness,and happiness.??
30. ?That intellect is immaculate, O Parth, which is aware of the
essence, of the way of inclination as also of renunciation, ofworthy and unworthy action, of fear and fearlessness, and ofbondage and liberation.??
 In other words, the righteous, morally good intellect is that which
is aware of the distinction between the way that leads to God and the
way to recurrent birth and death.
rÂgÍ karmaphalaprepsurlubdho hiØsÂtmako'ïuciÉ |
harîaïokÂnvitaÉ kartÂ rÂjasaÉ parikÍrtitaÉ ||27||ayuktaÉ prÂkçtaÉ stabdhaÉ ïaòho naiîkçtiko'lasaÉ |
viîÂdÍ dÍrghasötrÍ ca kartÂ tÂmasa ucyate ||28||
buddherbhedaØ dhçteïcaiva guàatastrividhaØ ïçàu |procyamÂnamaïeîena pçthaktvena dhanaájaya ||29||
pravçttiØ ca nivçttiØ ca kÂryÂkÂrye bhayÂbhaye |
bandhaØ mokîaØ ca yÂ vetti buddhiÉ sÂ pÂrtha sÂttvikÍ||30

Yatharth Geeta 412
ÙeÙee Oece&ceOeceË Ûe keâeÙeË ÛeekeâeÙe&cesJe Ûe~
DeÙeLeeJelØepeeveeefle yegefæ: mee heeLe& jepemeer~~31~~DeOeceË Oece&efceefle Ùee cevÙeles lecemeeJe=lee~
meJee&Lee&efvJehejerleeb§e yegefæ: mee heeLe& leecemeer~~32~~
Oe=lÙee  ÙeÙee  OeejÙeles  ceve:ØeeCesefvõÙeef?eâÙee:~ÙeesiesveeJÙeefYeÛeeefjCÙee Oe=efle: mee heeLe& meeefòJekeâer~~3331. ??That intellect is of the nature of passion and moral blindness,
O Parth, by which one cannot even know the righteous and
the unrighteous as well as what is worthy or unworthy of
being done.??
32. ?That intellect is of the nature of ignorance, O Parth, which is
enveloped in darkness and which apprehends the sinful asvirtuous and views everything in a distorted way.??
In verses 30-32 thus, intellect is graded into three kinds. The
intellect which is well aware of the action that has to be engaged in and
the action that has to be shunned, as well as of that which is fit or unfitto be done, is characterized by moral excellence. The intellect which
has only a dim perception of the righteous and the unrighteous action,
and which does not know the truth, is dominated by passion. Theperverse intellect that deems the sinful as virtuous, the destructible as
eternal, and the inauspicious as auspicious, is shrouded in the gloom
of ignorance.
The discussion of intellect is concluded here and Lord Krishn
next takes up the three kinds of steadfastness.
33. ??That resolute steadfastness, by which, O Parth, one governs
through the practice of yog operations of the mind, the life-
breaths, and the senses, is immaculate.??
Yog is the process of meditation, whereas the coming into mind
of any impulse other than the impulse to such contemplation is moral
transgression. Straying of the mind is deviation from the path of virtue.
The unwavering resolution with which a man rules over his mind, breath,and senses is, therefore, of the nature of goodness. Directing the mind,
yayÂ dharmamadharmaØ ca kÂryaØ cÂkÂryameva ca |
ayathÂvatprajÂnÂti buddhiÉ sÂ pÂrtha rÂjasÍ ||31||adharmaØ dharmamiti yÂ manyate tamasÂvçtÂ |
sarvÂrthÂnviparÍtÂØïca buddhiÉ sÂ pÂrtha tÂmasÍ ||32||
dhçtyÂ yayÂ dhÂrayate manaÉprÂàendriyakriyÂÉ |yogenÂvyabhicÂriàyÂ dhçtiÉ sÂ pÂrtha sÂttvikÍ ||33||

Chapter 18 413
ÙeÙee  leg  Oece&keâeceeLee&vOe=lÙee  OeejÙelesÓpeg&ve~
ØemeÁsve Heâueekeâe*dd#eer Oe=efle: mee heeLe& jepemeer~~34~~
ÙeÙee mJehe>b YeÙeb Meeskebâ efJe<eeob ceocesJe Ûe~ve efJecegÃeefle ogcexOee Oe=efle: mee heeLe& leecemeer~~35~~
megKeb eflJeoeveeR ef$eefJeOeb ëe=Ceg ces Yejle<e&Ye~
DeYÙeemeeõceles Ùe$e og:Keevleb Ûe efveieÛÚefle~~36~~Ùeòeo«es  efJe<eefceJe  heefjCeecesÓce=leeshececed~
lelmegKeb meeefòJekebâ ØeesòeâceelceyegefæØemeeopeced~~37~~the vital breaths, and the senses towards the desired goal is the morally
excellent fortitude.
34. ??That steadfastness, O Parth, by which the avaricious man
holds fast and acquisitively to obligations, wealth, and
pleasure, is of the nature of passion and moral blindness.??
Firmness of will in this case is concerned primarily with the
discharging of one?s worldly duties, acquisition of wealth, and sensual
pleasure, the three primary objects of material life, rather than with finalliberation. The final end may be the same, but in this case the seekeraspires to fruits and desires something in return for his labour.
35. ?And that steadfastness, O Parth, by which the evil-minded
man declines to forsake sloth, fear, worry, grief, and also
arrogance, is of the nature of ignorance.??
Lord Krishn next considers the three types of happiness-
36. ??Now listen to me, O the best of Bharat, on the three kinds of
happiness, including the felicity, which one comes to dwell
in, by practice and thus achieves cessation of griefs.??
That happiness is which the seeker attains to, by spiritual
discipline by concentrating his or her mind on the cherished goal and
this happiness is therefore a destroyer of griefs.
37. ?That happiness which is at first like poison but finally tastes
like nectar, for it issues forth from the lucidity of an intellect
that has realized the Self, is of an impeccable nature.?
yayÂ tu dharmakÂmÂrthÂndhçtyÂ dhÂrayate'rjuna |
prasaßgena phalÂkÂßkîÍ dhçtiÉ sÂ pÂrtha rÂjasÍ ||34||
yayÂ svapnaØ bhayaØ ïokaØ viîadaØ madameva ca |na vimuácati durmedhÂ dhçtiÉ sÂ pÂrtha tÂmasÍ ||35||
sukhaØ tvidÂnÍØ trividhaØ ïçàu me bharatarîabha |
abhyÂsÂdramate yatra duÉkhÂntaØ ca nigacchati ||36||yattadagre viîamiva pariàÂme'mçtopamam |
tatsukhaØ sÂttvikaØ proktamÂtmabuddhiprasÂdajam||37

Yatharth Geeta 414
efJe<eÙesefvõÙemebÙeesieeÅeòeo«esÓce=leeshececed  ~
heefjCeeces efJe<eefceJe lelmegKeb jepemeb mce=leced~~38~~
Ùeo«es ÛeevegyevOes Ûe megKeb ceesnveceelceve:~efveõeuemÙeØeceeoeslLeb leòeecemecegoeùleced~~39~~The happiness that is come by through spiritual exercise,
concentration of mind on the desired end, and in which all griefs come
to an end, is bitter like venom at the commencement of worship. Prahlad
was hanged and Meera was poisoned. Sant Kabir has pointed out thedifference between the pleasure-loving world, that feasts and fails into
unconscious slumber, and himself who stays awake shedding tears of
contrition. But although this happiness is like poison at the outset, atthe end it is like nectar that confers the substance of immortality. Such
happiness, born out of a clear understanding of the Self, is said to be
pure. Hence that happiness is immaculate which remains firmly inclinedin spiritual practices by understanding the directives of Self - well
awakened in the worshiper?s heart by grace of an accomplished sage.
38. ?That happiness which springs from the association of the
senses with their objects, and which is like nectar at the
beginning but like gall at the end, is said to be tainted with
passion and moral blindness.??
The happiness obtained from the contact of the senses with their
objects tastes like nectar in the course of enjoyment but like poison at
the end, for this kind of happiness leads to repeated birth and death. So
such happiness is rightly said to be impassioned and afflicted withmoral blindness.
39. ?That happiness which both initially and finally beguile the
Self, and which arises from slumber, lethargy, and
negligence, is said to be of the nature of ignorance.??
The happiness which both in the course of indulgence and
subsequently, deludes the Soul, lays one unconscious in the dark night
of worldly life, and which is born out of indolence and futile efforts, is of
the nature of ignorance.
viîayendriyasaØyogÂdyattadagre'mçtopamam |
pariàÂme viîamiva tatsukhaØ rÂjasaØ smçtam ||38||
yadagre cÂnubandhe ca sukhaØ mohanamÂtmanaÉ |nidrÂlasyapramÂdotthaØ tattÂmasamudÂhçtam ||39||

Chapter 18 415
ve leoefmle he=efLeJÙeeb Jee efoefJe osJes<eg Jee hegve:~
meòJeb Øeke=âeflepewceg&òebâ ÙeosefYe: mÙeeefl$eefYeieg&Cew:~~40~~Lord Krishn then proceeds to recount the scope of the properties
of nature that ever pursue us.
40. ?There is no being, either on earth or among the dwellers of
heaven, who is entirely free from the three properties born of
nature.?
All beings, right from Brahma at the top to worms and insects at
the lowest, are transient, mortal, and under the sway of the three
properties (Sattwa, rajas and tamas). Even heavenly beings includingthe various external gods, are subject to the malady of these properties.
Here, Yogeshwar Krishn has taken up the subject of external
gods for the fourth time. That is, gods were spoken of in chapter 7, 9,and 17. All the statements so far made by Lord Krishn, imply that godsare influenced by the three properties of nature. Those who worshipsuch gods, in reality worship that which is perishable and impermanent.
In the second section of Shreemad Bhagavat, during the
discourses, the sage Shuk said to king Parikshit that for love betweenmale and female, the Lord Sankara and his consort Parvati, for soundhealth the Ashwanikumar (the celestial physician twins), for victory theLord Indra (god Lord of heaven) and for material riches, Kuber (godprotector of wealth), are to be worshiped. Similarly, talking of variousdesires at the end, he gave verdict that for fulfillment of all desires andfor salvation one should worship the Lord Narayan alone.
Therefore, one should remember the Omnipresent Lord and for
such accomplishment the only available means is to take refuge in anaccomplished teacher, asking sincere questions and rendering service.Now see in this -
The devilish and divine treasures are two traits of the inner realm,
out of which the divine treasures enable one to have the great vision ofthe Supreme Being, hence they are called divine but yet are within the
na tadasti pçthivyÂØ va divi deveîu vÂ punaÉ |
sattvaØ prakçtijairmuktaØ yadebhiÉ syÂttçbhirguàaiÉ ||40||

Yatharth Geeta 416
yeÇeÿeCe#eef$eÙeefJeMeeb MetõeCeeb Ûe hejvlehe~
keâcee&efCe ØeefJeYeòeâeefve mJeYeeJeØeYeJewieg&Cew:~~41~~influence of the three properties of nature. When the three properties of
nature are pacified, the seeker too shall experience that absolute peacewithin. After this, such a realized sage- yogi shall have no more dutiesthat he needs to perform and he will have attained the state ofactionlessness.
The question of the organization of men into four classes (varn)
that was initiated much earlier is now reintroduced. Is one?s classdetermined by birth, or is it the name of the inner ability gained fromone?s action?
41. ?The duties of Brahmin, Kshatriy, Vaishy, as also of Shudr
are determined by properties that are born out of their nature.??If a man?s nature is made up of the property of goodness, there is
inner purity along with the ability to meditate and worship. If the
dominating property is that of ignorance, lethargy, sleep, and insanityare the outcome, and the attempted action is at their level. The capacityof one?s natural property is his varn-his character. Similarly, a partialcombination of goodness and passion constitutes the Kshatriy class,whereas a partial combination of the property of ignorance and that ofpassion constitutes the Vaishy class.
This is the fifth time when Yogeshwar Krishn has taken up the
issue. He named Kshatriy in Chapter 2 and said that ?there is nothingmore propitious for a Kshatriy than a righteous war.?(verse 31) In Chapter3 he said that although inferior in merit, one?s own natural calling (dharm)is the best and even meeting with death while upholding it results ingood, whereas an obligation other than one?s own, even though wellobserved, generates nothing but dread.(verse 35) In Chapter 4, then,he indicated that he is the creator of the four classes.(verse 13) Doeshe mean by this that he has divided men into four rigid castes determinedby birth? His answer to the question is an emphatic no, and he assertsthat he has but divided action into four categories according to their
brÂhmaàakîatriyaviïÂØ ïödrÂàÂØ ca parantapa |
karmÂài pravibhaktÂni svabhÂvaprabhavairguàaiÉ ||41||

Chapter 18 417
inherent properties. The innate property of a being or object is a measure-
a yardstick. So the division of mankind into four varn is only a divisionof the one and same action into four stages according to the motivatingproperties. In Lord Krishn?s words, action is the mode of attaining to theone, inexpressible God. The conduct that takes one to God is worship,which commences in faith in the desired end. So meditation on theSupreme Being is the one true action that Lord Krishn has-divided intofour steps in his system of varn. Now, how are we to know to whichproperty and stage we belong? This is what Lord Krishn turns to in thefollowing verses.
42. ?Self-restraint, subduing of the senses, innocence,
continence, mercy, uprightness, piety, true knowledge, and
direct perception of divinity are the Brahmins province-bornout of his nature.?
Restraining the mind, curbing the senses, flawless purity,
mortification of mind, speech, and body to mould them in tune with the
cherished goal, forgiveness, all-pervading righteousness, staunch faithin the one aimed at goal, consciousness of the Supreme Being, theawakening in the realm of the heart of the exhortations coming fromGod, and the ability to act according to them-are all a Brahmin'sobligations that arise from his own nature. It might be said, therefore,that the seeker is a Brahmin when all these merits are present in himand the commenced action is an integral part of his nature.
43. ?Valour, majesty, dexterity, unwillingness to retreat in battle,
charity, and sovereignty are the natural province of a
Kshatriy.?
Doughtiness, achievement of divine glory, forbearance,
competence in meditation-skill in action, disinclination to run away from
Mecees ocemlehe: MeewÛeb #eeefvlejepe&JecesJe Ûe~
%eeveb efJe%eeveceeefmlekeäÙeb yeÇÿekeâce& mJeYeeJepeced~~42~~MeewÙeË lespees Oe=efleoe&#Ùeb Ùegæs ÛeehÙeheueeÙeveced~
oeveceerÕejYeeJe§e #ee$eb keâce& mJeYeeJepeced~~43~~
ïamo damastapaÉ ïaucaØ kîÂntirÂrjavameva ca |
jáÂnaØ vijáÂnamÂstikyaØ brahmakarma svabhÂvajam ||42ïauryaØ tejo dhçtirdÂkîyaØ yuddhe cÂpyapalÂyanam |
dÂnamÍïvarabhÂvaïca kîÂtraØ karma svabhÂvajam ||43||

Yatharth Geeta 418
struggle with the material world, relinquishment of all, and domination
of all feelings by feeling for the Supreme Being-are all activities born
out of the nature of a Kshatriy.
44. ?Farming,  protection of cows (the senses) and commerce
are the natural province of a Vaishy, whereas rendering
service is the natural calling of a Shudr.??
Agriculture, rearing of cattle, and commerce are duties in keeping
with the nature of a Vaishy. Why only preservation of cows? Should we
slaughter buffaloes? Is it wrong to keep goats? There is nothing at all
like all this. In the ancient Vedic text, the word ?go? (cow) was used to
refer to the senses. So protection of ?cows? means care of the senses.The senses are protected by discernment, non-attachment, restraint,
and steadfastness. They are, on the other hand, riven and rendered
feeble by lust, wrath, avarice, and attachment. Spiritual acquisition isthe only true wealth. This is our one true asset and once it has been
earned, it stays on with us forever. Gradual amassing of this wealth in
the course of our struggle with the world of matter or nature is trade.The acquisition of knowledge, which is the most precious of all riches,is commerce. And what is farming? The body is like a piece of earth.
The seeds which are sown in it sprout in the form of sanskar-the merits
of action: the force that is built up by all the actions in previous lives.Arjun is told that the seed (the initial impulse) of selfless action is never
destroyed. Vaishy is the third step of the ordained action- of
contemplation of the Supreme Being; and preservation of the seeds ofdivine meditation that are sown in this patch of earth-the body, while at
the same time opposing hostile impulses, is agriculture. As Goswami
Tulsidas has said, whereas the wise husbandman farms well and withcare, they who are of deficient wisdom are insensible and arrogant. To
protect the senses thus, to store spiritual wealth amidst the skirmishes
of nature, and to always strengthen contemplation of the ultimate
essence are the province of Vaishy.
ke=âef<eieewj#ÙeJeeefCepÙeb JewMÙekeâce& mJeYeeJepeced~
heefjÛeÙee&lcekebâ keâce& MetõmÙeeefhe mJeYeeJepeced~~44~~
kçîigorakîyavÂàijyaØ vaiïyakarma svabhÂvajam |
paricaryÂtmakaØ karma ïödrasyÂpi svabhÂvajam ||44||

Chapter 18 419
According to Lord Krishn, the omnipresent God is the final outcome
of yagya. The devout souls who partake of this fruit are emancipated
from all sins and it is the seeds of this action that are sown by themeditative process. To protect this germ is true husbandry. In Vedicwritings food means the Supreme Spirit. God is the only real sustenance-the food. The Soul is fully placated at the completion of the exercise ofcontemplation and never again knows any craving. Once the exercisehas been brought to successful conclusion, the Soul is freed from thecycle of birth and death. To go ahead sowing the seeds of this food istrue husbandry.
To serve those who have attained to a higher spiritual status,
revered men of accomplishment, is the duty of Shudr. Rather thanmeaning ?base??, Shudr means ?one with deficient knowledge.? It is theseeker at the lowest stage who is a Shudr. It is but proper that thisinitiate worshiper should begin his quest with rendering service. Serviceto men of accomplishment will in the course of time generate noblerimpulses in him and he will thus gradually move up to the higher Vaishy,Kshatriy, and Brahmin stages. And ultimately he will go beyond varn(properties of nature) and become one with God. Character is a dynamicentity. There is change in an individual?s varn along with changes in hischaracter. So, in fact, varn are the four-excellent, good, medium, andlow-stages: the four steps, low and high, which seekers who tread thepath of action have to climb. This is so because the action in questionis only one-the ordained action. The only way to final attainmentaccording to Lord Krishn is that the worshiper should begin his journeyin keeping with the attributes of his own nature.
45. ?Commitment to his own inborn duty brings man to the
ultimate accomplishment and you should listen to me on
how a man achieves perfection through dedication to hisinnate calling.??
mJes mJes keâce&CÙeefYejle: mebefmeefæb ueYeles vej:~
mJekeâce&efvejle: efmeefæb ÙeLee efJevoefle leÛÚ=Ceg~~45~~
sve sve karmaàyabhirataÉ saØsiddhiØ labhate naraÉ |
svakarmanirataÉ siddhiØ yathÂ vindati tacchçàu ||45||

Yatharth Geeta 420
The perfection that is ultimately achieved is realization of God.
Lord Krishn told Arjun earlier, too, that he would reach this final goal by
engaging in action-the real, prescribed action.
46. ?By adoration of that God, who has created all beings and
who pervades the whole universe, through the undertaking
of his natural calling, man attains to final accomplishment.??
The seeker achieves final consummation through performance of
his native duties. It is, therefore, essential that he should constantly
keep his mind fixed on God, adore him, and proceed on his way step bystep. Instead of making any gain, a junior student even loses whateverhe has if he sits in a senior class. So the law is that one should climbstep by step. Now, stressing the same point, Lord Krishn says againthat even a partially enlightened man ought to begin from the samepoint: from self-surrender to God.
47. ?Even though unmeritorious, one?s own native calling is
superior to the office of others, for a man carrying out his
natural obligation does not bring sin upon himself.?
Although inferior, one?s own obligation is better than even the well
performed duties of others. A man absorbed in performing a task that is
determined by his own nature does not incur sin in so far as he is notsubjected to the endless cycle of ?entrances? and ?exits?-of birth anddeath. It is quite often that worshipers begin to feel disenchanted withthe service they are rendering-. They look at the more accomplishedseekers who are absorbed in meditation and grow envious of the honourthat is accorded them because of their merits. So novices at once fallto imitating. According to Lord Krishn, however, imitation or envy canbe of no avail. The final accomplishment is only by dedication to one?sown native calling, not by its abandonment.
Ùele: ØeJe=efòeYet&leeveeb Ùesve meJe&efceob leleced~
mJekeâce&Cee leceYÙeÛÙe& efmeefæb efJevoefle ceeveJe:~~46~~
ßesÙeevmJeOeceex efJeiegCe: hejOecee&lmJevegef?leeled~mJeYeeJeefveÙeleb keâce& kegâJe&Veehe>esefle efkeâefuye<eced~~47~~
yataÉ pravçttirbhötÂnÂØ yena sarvamidaØ tatam |
svakarmaàÂ tamabhyarcya siddhiØ vindati mÂnavaÉ||46
ïreyÂnsvadharmo viguàaÉ paradharmÂtsvanuîòhitÂt |svabhÂvaniyataØ karma kurvannÂpnoti kilbiîam ||47||

Chapter 18 421
48. ?One?s innate duty ought not to be forsaken, O son of Kunti,
even if it is blemished, because all actions are impaired by
some flaw or the other as fire is shrouded by smoke.?
It is but expected that the actions of the novice seeker are flawed,
for their doer is yet far from perfection. But even these actions must not
be given up. Moreover, there is no action that is unimpeachable. Andaction has to be undertaken even by one, who belongs to the Brahminclass. Imperfections-the obscuring pall of nature-are there until there issteady devotion. They come to an end only when the action natural toa Brahmin is dissipated in God. But what are the attributes of theaccomplisher at the point where action is no longer of any avail?
49. ?He whose intellect is aloof all round, who is without desire,
and who has conquered his mind, attains to the ultimate state
that transcends all action through renunciation.?
?Renunciation? is, as we have already seen, complete self-
abnegation. It is the condition in which the seeker abandons whatever
he has and only then does he reach the point when no further action isneeded. ?Renunciation? and ?attainment of the Supreme State ofactionlessness? are synonymous here. A Sankhya yogi reaches thesame destination which a Karm Yogi finds through way of selfless action.This attainment is one and the same for wayfarers of both the ways.The yogi who has reached the state of actionlessness attains to theSupreme Being.
50. ?Learn in brief from me, O son of Kunti, of how one who is
immaculate achieves realization of the Supreme Being, which
represents the culmination of knowledge.??
menpeb keâce& keâewvlesÙe meoes<eceefhe ve lÙepesled~
meJee&jcYee efn oes<esCe Oetcesveeefie>efjJeeJe=lee:~~48~~Demeòeâyegefæ: meJe&$e efpeleelcee efJeielemhe=n:~
vew<keâcÙe&efmeefæb hejceeb meVÙeemesveeefOeieÛÚefle~~49~~
efmeefæb Øeehlees ÙeLee yeÇÿe leLeehe>esefle efveyeesOe ces~meceemesvewJe keâewvlesÙe efve?e %eevemÙe Ùee heje~~50~~
sahajaØ karma kaunteya sadoîamapi na tyajet |
sarvÂrambhÂ hi doîeàa dhömenÂgnirivÂvçtÂÉ ||48||asaktabuddhiÉ sarvatra jitÂtmÂ vigataspçhaÉ |
naiîkarmyasiddhiØ paramÂØ sannyÂsenÂdhigacchati ||49||
siddhiØ prÂpto yathÂ brahma tathÂpnoti nibodha me |samÂsenaiva kaunteya niîòhÂ jáÂnasya yÂ parÂ ||50||

Yatharth Geeta 422
The following verses expound that way:
51. ?Blessed with a pure intellect, firmly in command of the Self,
with objects of sensual gratification like sound forsaken, with
both fondness and revulsion destroyed, -?
52. ?Dwelling in seclusion, eating frugally, subdued in mind,
speech and body, incessantly given to the yog of meditation,firmly resigned, -??
53. ?And of giving up conceit, arrogance of power, yearning, ill
humour, and acquisitiveness, devoid of attachment, and inpossession of a mind at repose, a man is worthy of becomingone with God.?
It is further said of such a worshiper:
54. ?In this serene-tempered man, who views all beings equally,
who abides intently in the Supreme Being, neither grieving
over nor hankering after anything, there is fostered a faith inme that transcends all else.??
Now faith is at the stage where an outcome can ensue from it,
namely, in the form of God-realization.55. ?Through his transcendental faith he knows my essence well,
what my reach is, and having thus known my essence he is
at once united with me.?
yegæ?ee efJeMegæÙee Ùegòeâes Oe=lÙeelceeveb efveÙecÙe Ûe~
MeyoeoerefvJe<eÙeebmlÙekeälJee jeieÉs<eew JÙegomÙe Ûe~~51~~
efJeefJeòeâmesJeer ueIJeeMeer ÙeleJeekeäkeâeÙeceeveme:~OÙeeveÙeesiehejes efvelÙeb JewjeiÙeb mecegheeefßele:~~52~~
Den¿ejb yeueb oheË keâeceb ?eâesOeb heefj«enced~
efJecegÛÙe efvece&ce: Meevlees yeÇÿeYetÙeeÙe keâuheles~~53~~yeÇÿeYetle: ØemeVeelcee ve MeesÛeefle ve keâe*dd#eefle~
mece: meJex<eg Yetles<eg ceÆefòebâ ueYeles hejeced~~54~~
YekeälÙee ceeceefYepeeveeefle ÙeeJeevÙe§eeefmce leòJele:~lelees ceeb leòJelees %eelJee efJeMeles leovevlejced~~55~~buddhyÂ viïuddhayÂ yukto dhçtyÂtmÂnaØ niyamya ca |
ïabdÂdÍnviîayÂØstyaktvÂ rÂgadveîau vyudasya ca ||51||
viviktasevÍ laghvÂïÍ yatavÂkkÂyamÂnasaÉ |dhyÂnayogaparo nityaØ vairÂgyaØ samupÂïritaÉ ||52||
ahaßkÂraØ balaØ darpaØ kÂmaØ krodhaØ parigraham|
vimucya nirmamaÉ ïÂnto brahmabhöyÂya kalpate ||53||brahmabhötaÉ prasannÂtmÂ na ïocati na kÂßkîati |
samaÉ sarveîu bhöteîu madbhaktiØ labhate parÂm ||54||
bhaktyÂ mÂmabhijÂnÂti yÂvÂnyaïcÂsmi tattvataÉ |tato mÂØ tattvato jáÂtvÂ viïate tadanantaram ||55||

Chapter 18 423
The Supreme Being is perceived at the moment of attainment
and, no sooner has this perception come about than the worshiper finds
his own Soul blessed with the attributes of God himself: that his soul is-like God-indestructible, immortal, eternal, ineffable, and universal.
Lord Krishn said in Chapter 2 that the Self is real, eternal,
permanent, ineffable, and of the stuff of immortality. But only seershave apprehended him endowed with these qualities. So naturally thequestion arises as to what is meant by perception of the essence.There are many who set out to make rational tabulations of five ortwenty-five principles. But Lord Krishn?s verdict on the problem inChapter 18 is quite clear, that God is the one Supreme Essence. Andone who knows him is the seer. If you desire to know the truth andcrave for the essence of God, contemplation and worship are aninescapable necessity.
Here, in verses 49 to 55, Yogeshwar Krishn has laid down explicitly
that one has to act in the way of renunciation, too. As promised by him,he will expound  in  brief  how  through  constant exercise  of renunciation-through the Way of Knowledge-the  worshiper who is free from desireand attachment, and who has an upright mind, attains to the SupremeState of actionlessness. When the maladies of vanity, brute power,lust, wrath, arrogance, and infatuation-that force one down into theravines of nature-are rendered feeble, and virtues such as discernment,non-attachment, self-restraint, firmness of will, abiding in solitude, andmeditation-that lead one to God-are fully developed and active, theseeker is equipped to be united with the Supreme Being. It is this abilitythat is called transcendental faith and it is by this that the worshipercomes to apprehend the ultimate reality. He then knows what God isand, knowing his divine glories, he is at once merged with him. Puttingit differently, Brahm, reality, God, the Supreme Spirit, and Self are allsubstitutes for each other. Knowing any one of them, we come to knowthem all. This is the final accomplishment, the final liberation, the finalgoal.

Yatharth Geeta 424
So the Geeta is unambiguous in its view that in both the Way of
Knowledge or Discernment (or the Way of Renunciation) and the Way
of Selfless Action, the ordained deed-meditation-has to be entered uponand accomplished for the attainment of the Supreme State ofactionlessness.
The importance of worship and meditation for the worshiper who
has renounced all has been stressed so far. And now by introducing theidea of ?devotion? the same is said for the yogi who undertakes selflessaction.
56. ?Although engaged in action whole-heartedly, one who finds
refuge in me achieves the everlasting, indestructible, final
bliss.??
The deed to be performed is the same-the ordained action, the
exercise of yagya. And to gain it there must be self-surrender.57. ?Earnestly resigning all your deeds to me, finding shelter in
me, and embracing the yog of knowledge, you should ever
fix your mind on me.?
Arjun is counselled to sincerely yield all his actions-whatever he
is capable of doing-to Lord Krishn, to rest in his mercy rather than
depend upon his own prowess, to find shelter in him, to adopt the attitudeof yog, and always bring his mind to bear on him. Yog means completion,unity, that which brings griefs to an end and provides access to God.Its mode, too, is a unity, the exercise of yagya which is founded onrestraint of the attacking impulses of the mind and the senses, theregulation of the incoming and outgoing breath, and on meditation. Itsoutcome, also, is with the eternal God. The same is elaborated in thenext verse.
meJe&keâcee&CÙeefhe meoe kegâJee&Cees ceoddJÙeheeßeÙe:~
celØemeeoeoJeehe>esefle MeeÕeleb heoceJÙeÙeced~~56~~
Ûeslemee meJe&keâcee&efCe ceefÙe meVÙemÙe celhej:~yegefæÙeesiecegheeefßelÙe ceefÛÛeòe: meleleb YeJe~~57~~
sarvakarmÂàyapi sadÂ kurvÂào madvyapÂïrayaÉ |
matprasÂdÂdavÂpnoti ïÂïvataØ padamavyayam ||56||
cetasÂ sarvakarmÂài mayi sannyasya matparaÉ |buddhiyogamupÂïritya maccittaÉ satataØ bhava ||57||

Chapter 18 425
58. ?Ever resting on me, you will be saved from all afflictions
and gain deliverance, but you shall be destroyed if out of
arrogance you do not pay heed to my words .?
 Thus always focusing his mind on Lord Krishn, Arjun will conquer
the citadels of the mind and the senses. As Goswami Tulsidas has put
it, even celestial beings seated at the portals of these forts obstinatelykeep the shutters ajar as the breezes of carnal pleasure blow in. Themind and the senses at the core are the impregnable redoubts. ButArjun can storm them by aiming his thoughts at God alone. On theother hand, however, he shall be undone and deprived of the ultimategood if out of vanity he does not pay heed to Lord Krishn?s words. Thepoint is reaffirmed.
59. ?Your egotistic resolve not to fight is surely mistaken, for
your nature will compel you to take up arms in the war.??
60. ?Bound by your natural calling even against your resolve, O
son of Kunti, you will have to undertake the deed you are
reluctant to do because of your self-deception.?
His innate disinclination to retreat from the battle with nature will
compel Arjun to set upon the task before him. The subject is concluded
with this and Lord Krishn next speaks on the dwelling of God.
61. ?Propelling all living things that bestride a body-which is
but a contrivance-by his maya, O Arjun, God abides in the
hearts of all beings.??
ceefÛÛeòe: meJe&ogiee&efCe celØemeeoeòeefj<Ùeefme~
DeLe ÛesòJecen¿ejeVe ßees<Ùeefme efJeve*dd#Ùeefme~~58~~Ùeon¿ejceeefßelÙe ve ÙeeslmÙe Fefle cevÙemes~
efceLÙew<e JÙeJemeeÙemles Øeke=âeflemlJeeb efveÙees#Ùeefle~~59~~
mJeYeeJepesve keâewvlesÙe efveyeæ: mJesve keâce&Cee~keâlegË vesÛÚefme Ùevceesnelkeâefj<ÙemÙeJeMeesÓefhe leled~~60~~
F&Õej:  meJe&Yetleeveeb  ùösMesÓpeg&ve  efle?efle~
YeüeceÙevmeJe&Yetleeefve Ùev$ee¤{eefve ceeÙeÙee~~61~~
maccittaÉ sarvadurgÂài matprasÂdÂttariîyasi |
atha cettvamahaßkÂrÂnna ïroîyasi vinaßkîyasi ||58||yadahaßkÂramÂïritya na yotsya iti manyase |
mithyaiîa vyavasÂyaste prakçtistvÂØ niyokîyati ||59||
svabhÂvajena kaunteya nibaddhaÉ svena karmaàÂ |kartuØ necchasi yanmohÂtkariîyasyavaïo'pi tat ||60||
ÍïvaraÉ sarvabhötÂnÂØ hçddeïe'rjuna tiîòhati |
bhrÂmayansarvabhötÂni yantrÂröÅhÂni mÂyayÂ ||61||

Yatharth Geeta 426
But if God lives in our hearts and is so close to us, why are we
ignorant of his presence? This is so because the contraptions we call
body are driven by the power of maya, the universal ignorance or illusionby virtue of which we consider the unreal universe as real and distinctfrom the Supreme Spirit. So this physical mechanism is a graveimpediment and it takes us round endlessly through one birth afteranother. Where, then, can we find shelter or refuge?
62. ?Seek refuge with all your heart, O Bharat, in that God by
whose grace you will attain to repose and the everlasting,
ultimate bliss.??
So if we have to meditate, we should do it within the realm of the
heart. If we know this and yet seek for God in a temple, mosque or
church, we but waste our time. Notwithstanding this, however, as itwas said earlier too, these places of formal worship have their importancefor seekers with inadequate awareness. The heart is the true abode ofGod. It is the message of even the Bhagwat Mahapuran: that althoughGod is all-pervading, he is realized only by meditation in the realm ofheart.
63. ?Thus have I imparted to you the knowledge which is the
most mysterious of all abstruse learning; so reflect well on
the whole of it and then you may do as you wish.?
The wisdom that Lord Krishn has accorded is the truth; it marks
the sphere where the seeker has to make his quest; and it is also the
point of attainment. Yet the harsh fact is that God is commonly notperceptible. Lord Krishn now deliberates upon the way out of thisdifficulty.
lecesJe  MejCeb  ieÛÚ  meJe&YeeJesve  Yeejle~
lelØemeeoelhejeb Meeefvleb mLeeveb ØeehmÙeefme MeeÕeleced~~62~~Fefle les %eeveceeKÙeeleb ieg¢eeoddieg¢elejb ceÙee~
efJece=MÙewleoMes<esCe ÙeLesÛÚefme leLee kegâ®~~63~~
tameva ïaraàaØ gaccha sarvabhÂvena bhÂrata |
tatprasÂdÂtparÂØ ïÂntiØ sthÂnaØ prÂpsyasi ïÂïvatam||62iti te jáÂnamÂkhyÂtaØ guhyÂdguhyataraØ mayÂ |
vimçïyaitadaïeîeàa yathecchasi tathÂ kuru ||63||

Chapter 18 427
64. ?Listen yet again to my most secret words, indeed felicitous,
that I am going to speak to you because you are the dearest
to me.?
Lord Krishn endeavours once more to enlighten Arjun. God always
stands by the seeker, for he is so dear to him. Arjun is beloved of Lord
Krishn and any benediction that the Lord bestows upon him cannot betoo much. He will incessantly exert himself for the sake of his devotee.But what is the blessed revelation that Lord Krishn is going to make toArjun?
65. ?I give you my sincere pledge, because you are so dear to
me, that you must attain to me if you keep me in mind, adore
me, worship me, and bow in obeisance to me.?
Arjun was exhorted earlier to seek refuge in the God that dwells in
the realm of the heart. And now he is prompted to find shelter under
Lord Krishn. He is also told that in order to find this sanctuary he has tolisten again to the Lord?s most esoteric words. Doesn?t Lord Krishnintend to communicate by this that finding shelter under a noble teacher-preceptor is indispensable for the seeker who has taken to the spiritualpath? Lord Krishn, a Yogeshwar, then enlightens Arjun on the way oftrue self-surrender.
66. ?Grieve not, for l shall free you from all sins if you abandon
all other obligations (dharm) and seek refuge in me alone.? Arjun is counselled that he has to rid himself of concern about
what category of doer he is, whether Brahmin or Kshatriy or Vaishy or
Shudr, and look for shelter under Lord Krishn alone. By doing so, he will
meJe&ieg¢eleceb  YetÙe:  ëe=Ceg  ces  hejceb  JeÛe:~
F°esÓefme ces Â{efceefle lelees Je#Ùeeefce les efnleced~~64~~cevcevee YeJe ceÆòeâes ceÅeepeer ceeb vecemkegâ®~
ceecesJew<Ùeefme melÙeb les Øeeflepeeves efØeÙeesÓefme ces~~65~~
meJe&Oecee&vheefjlÙepÙe  ceeceskebâ  MejCeb  ?epe~Denb lJee meJe&heehesYÙees cees#eefÙe<Ùeeefce cee MegÛe:~~66~~
sarvaguhyatamaØ bhöyaÉ ïçàu me paramaØ vacaÉ |
iîòo'si me dçÅhamiti tato vakîyÂmi te hitam ||64||manmanÂ bhava madbhakto madyÂjÍ mÂØ namaskuru |
mÂmevaiîyasi satyaØ te pratijÂne priyo'si me ||65||
sarvadharmÂnparityajya mÂmekaØ ïaraàaØ vraja |ahaØ tvÂØ sarvapÂpebhyo mokîayiîyÂmi ma ïucaÉ ||66||

Yatharth Geeta 428
be absolved of all iniquities and afflictions. The chosen teacher-preceptor
takes it upon himself to affect the gradual elevation of the pupil to evermore refined spiritual states and his release from all sins if, instead ofworrying about his position on the path of action, the pupil single-mindedlyseeks refuge in his mentor, and looks up to no one else but hisaccomplished teacher-preceptor. All sages have said the same. Whena holy writing is rendered, it may appear that it is for all, but it is truly?secret teaching?- secret undoubtedly because it is permitted only tothose who are spiritually equipped to study and profit by it. Arjun issuch a deserving pupil and so it is that Lord Krishn instructs him soearnestly. Now Lord Krishn himself elaborates the merits of the worthypupil.
67. ?This (the Geeta) which has been articulated for you must
never be made known to one who is bereft of penance,
devotion, and of willingness to listen, as also to one whospeaks ill of me.??
Lord Krishn was a realized sage and, along with adorers, he must
also have faced some slanderers. The Geeta is not for people who
speak maliciously of God. But, then, to whom should this SacredKnowledge be made known?
The question is quite natural but whom to address? As Lord Krishn,
in chapter 2/52-53, has said to Arjun that he would be eligible to listenonly when his intellect would cross the slough of attachments. Onlythen he would be able to listen and act accordingly leading torenunciation. When his mind derailed by the words of Ved (he heard alot the words of Ved but his mind got confused) would be stable andunwavering, only then he would attain the Yog. God had to keep himwaiting till he was eligible to listen. Here the connotation is that thosewho are not capable to get their senses rigorously tuned to the directionsof the adored God and those who are devoid of devotion, not able to
Fob les veelehemkeâeÙe veeYeòeâeÙe keâoeÛeve~
ve ÛeeMegßet<eJes JeeÛÙeb ve Ûe ceeb ÙeesÓYÙemetÙeefle~~67~~
idaØ te nÂtapaskÂya nÂbhaktÂya kadÂcana |
na cÂïuïruîave vÂcyaØ na ca mÂØ yo'bhyasöyati ||67||

Chapter 18 429
completely surrender, have not inquisitiveness to listen, who suffer from
the lack of faith in him who is to be heard devotedly, are not capableand eligible to absorb the teachings because their mind is still agnostic.Through the close company and service to a self-realized sage, suchmen are to be made eligible. Only after this the preaching to themwould be meaningful. So then Lord Krishn describes further those towhom the Geeta is addressed and are capable and eligible to receiveits sacred knowledge.
68. ?The one who, with firm devotion to me, imparts this most
secret teaching of my worshipers will doubtlessly attain to
me.??
And then Lord Krishn speaks about the one who disseminates
the sacred knowledge.69. ?Neither is there among mankind any doer who is dearer to
me than this man, nor will there be any in the world who is
dearer to me than him.??
The man who enlightens Lord Krishn?s devotees, Souls who
adhere to the Lord, is the most beloved of him because he is the only
source of benediction-the only highway that leads one to God. He is theone who teaches men to go along the right path.
70. ?And it is my belief that I shall have been worshiped through
the yagya of knowledge by one who makes a thorough study
of this Sacred Dialogue between us.??
The ?yagya of knowledge? is that, the outcome of which is wisdom.
The nature of this wisdom has been elaborated earlier. This wisdom is
the awareness that is acquired along with direct perception of God. And
Ùe Fceb hejceb ieg¢eb ceÆòesâ<JeefYeOeemÙeefle~
Yeefòebâ ceefÙe hejeb ke=âlJee ceecesJew<ÙelÙemebMeÙe:~~68~~
ve Ûe lemceevceveg<Ùes<eg keâef§evces efØeÙeke=âòece:~YeefJelee ve Ûe ces lemceeovÙe: efØeÙelejes YegefJe~~69~~
DeOÙes<Ùeles Ûe Ùe Fceb OecÙeË mebJeeoceeJeÙees:~
%eeveÙe%esve lesveenefce°: mÙeeefceefle ces ceefle:~~70~~
ya imaØ paramaØ guhyaØ madbhakteîvabhidhÂsyati |
bhaktiØ mayi parÂØ kçtvÂ mÂmevaiîyatyasaØïayaÉ ||68||
na ca tasmÂnmanuîyeîu kaïcinme priyakçttamaÉ |bhavitÂ na ca me tasmÂdanyaÉ priyataro bhuvi ||69||
adhyeîyate ca ya imaØ dharmyaØ saØvÂdamÂvayoÉ |
jáÂnayajáena tenÂhamiîòaÉ syÂmiti me matiÉ ||70||

Yatharth Geeta 430
it is with such wisdom, such awareness, that the dedicated and
industrious disciple of the Geeta will adore Lord Krishn. This is somethingof which the Lord is firmly assured.
71. ??Even he will be freed from sins who just hears it (the Geeta)
with devoutness and without any ill will, and he will secure
the worlds of the righteous.?
Even hearing the teachings of the Geeta with faith and without
any carping is enough to elevate one to a superior mode of existence,
for by this too its sacred precepts will be inculcated in the mind.
 Lord Krishn has thus, in verses 67 to 71, said that imparting of
the teachings of the Geeta to the deserving is as vital as withholdingthem from the undeserving. Since even hearing the secret teaching ofthe Geeta motivates the worshiper to the required endeavour, the onewho just hears it will also surely attain to Lord Krishn. As for the onewho propagates the scripture, no one else is dearer to the Lord than thisman. The man who studies the Geeta worships Lord Krishn by theyagya of knowledge. True knowledge is what issues forth from theprocess called yagya. In the verses under consideration, thus, the Lordhas pointed out the benefits of study, dissemination, and hearing of theGeeta.
 Now at the end he asks Arjun if he has understood and assimilated
his words.
72. ?Have you, O Parth, listened intently to my words and, O
Dhananjay, is your delusion born out of ignorance
dispelled??
ßeæeJeevevemetÙe§e  ëe=CegÙeeoefhe  Ùees  vej:~
meesÓefhe cegòeâ: MegYeeBuueeskeâevØeehe>gÙeelhegCÙekeâce&Ceeced~~71~~
keâefÛÛeosleÛÚÎleb heeLe& lJeÙewkeâe«esCe Ûeslemee~
keâefÛÛeo%eevemecceesn: Øeve°mles OeveÀeÙe~~72~~
ïraddhÂvÂnanasöyaïca ïçàuyÂdapi yo naraÉ |
so'pi muktaÉ ïubhÂllokÂnprÂpnuyÂtpuàyakarmaàÂm||71
kaccidetacchrutaØ pÂrtha tvayaikÂgreàa cetasÂ |
kaccidajáÂnasammohaÉ praàaîòaste dhanaájaya ||72

Chapter 18 431
73. ?Arjun said, ?Since my ignorance has been dispelled by your
grace, O Achyut, and I have recovered discernment, I am free
from doubt and shall follow your precept.? ??
?Achyut! Because of Your grace, my passion is destroyed, I have
regained my memory, I am consistent, being bereft of doubts and am
ever ready to obey Your orders.? Whereas, Arjun was perplexed at thetime of reviewing both the armies, to find his kith and kin therein. Heprayed ?Govind! How can we be happy after annihilation of our ownrelatives? Family tradition will be destroyed because of such a war,there will be scarcity of obsequial offerings like rice cakes and so on tothe departed ancestors, hybridization or mongrelization of castes takesplace. We, being wise, yet are ready to commit sin. Why do we not finda way out of committing these sins? Let the armed Kaurava kill me, anunarmed man, in the war and that death is glorious. Govind, I am notgoing to wage war.? Saying thus he sat down at the back of the chariot.
Thus in the Geeta, Arjun, in fact, put forward in front of Yogeshwar
Krishn a series of big and small questions. Like in chapter 2 verse 7,?Please will You tell me that practice of worship through which I canattain to the Absolute good.? In chapter 2 verse 54, ?What are theattributes of an enlightened sage?? In verse 1 of chapter 3, ?If in yourview the way of knowledge is superior, then why do you compel me todo these terrible actions?? In verse 36 of chapter 3, ?Even withoutwishing, under whose guidance does a man commit sin?? In verse 4 ofchapter 4, ?Your birth is of recent times, whereas the Sun was born along time back, then how can I believe that You taught yog to the Sunin the far distant past, in the beginning of this kalp??? In verse 1 ofchapter 5, ?Sometimes You praise renunciation, the Way of Knowledge,and yet other times You support the Way of Selfless Action. Please tellme one out of these which is final, by which I can attain to the Absolutegood.? In verse 35 of chapter 6, ?The Mind is very fickle. With slack
Depeg&ve GJeeÛe-
ve°es ceesn: mce=efleue&yOee lJelØemeeoevceÙeeÛÙegle~
efmLeleesÓefmce ielemevosn: keâefj<Ùes JeÛeveb leJe~~73~~
arjuna uvÂca-
naîòo mohaÉ smçtirlabdhÂ tvatprasÂdÂnmayÂcyuta |
sthito'smi gatasandehaÉ kariîye vacanaØ tava ||73

Yatharth Geeta 432
efforts, what would be his lot?? In verses 1 and 2 of chapter 8, ?Govind,
who is that Supreme Being, whom You have described? What is thereligious knowledge? What are Lords of gods and Lord of being? Who isthe Lord of sacrifice in this body? What is that action? How do Youcome to be known at the end time?? Thus he put forward sevenquestions. In verse 17 of chapter 10, Arjun has evinced curiosity, asking,??While meditating incessantly, through what feelings (emotions) do Icall you to mind, to remember you???  In verse 4 of chapter 11 he prayedand submitted, ?I long to see the splendours that have been describedby You.? In verse 1 of chapter 12, ?Who is the superior possessor ofYoga among the devotees who worship you well through unvacillatingattentiveness and those who worship the imperishable unmanifestSupreme Being?? In verse 21 of chapter 14, ?A man who has surpassedthe three natural modes is liberated of character and how can a mansurpass these three modes?? In verse 1 of chapter 17, ??what would bethe fate of a person who engages in yagya with dedication but does notfollow the procedure as laid down by the scriptures??? And in verse 1 ofchapter 18, ?O mighty armed! I yearn to learn separately and individuallyeverything about the nature of relinquishment and renunciation.?
Thus, throughout the Geeta, Arjun continued to put forward queries
(the esoteric secrets which could not be asked by him were revealed bythe Lord Himself). As soon as his doubts were dispelled Arjun wasfreed from asking questions and said,? Govind! Now I am ever ready toobey your instructions.? In truth the questions raised were for the benefitof all mankind and not just for Arjun alone. Without having thesequestions answered, no seeker can progress forward on the path of thehighest good. Therefore, to enable a man to obey an enlightened guruand to progress on the path of the highest good, it is necessary, thatone should learn the complete teachings of the Geeta. Arjun wasconvinced and satisfied that all his questions had been answered andhis doubts allayed.
In Chapter 11, after having revealed his cosmic form, Lord Krishn
said in the fifty-fourth verse: ?O Arjun ... a worshiper can directly know

Chapter 18 433
this form of mine, acquire its essence, and even become one with it by
total and unswerving dedication.? And just now he has asked him whetherhe is rid of his delusion. Arjun replies that his ignorance is allayed andthat his understanding is restored. Now he will act at Lord Krishn?sbehest. Arjun?s liberation should come along with this realization. Hehas indeed become whatever he had to be. But scripture is meant forposterity and the Geeta is here for all of us to avail ourselves of.
74. ?Sanjay said, ?Thus have I heard the mysterious and sublime
dialogue of Vasudev and the sage-like Arjun.? ??Arjun is portrayed as a man with a noble Soul. He is a yogi, a
seeker, rather than an archer set to kill. But how has Sanjay been
enabled to hear the dialogue between Lord Krishn and the saintly Arjun?
75. ?It is by the blessing of the Most Revered Vyas Ji that I have
heard this transcendental, most mysterious yog enunciated
directly by the Lord of yog Krishn himself.?
Sanjay regards Lord Krishn as a master of yog - one who is a yogi
himself and who is also endowed with the gift of imparting yog to others.76. ?The recollection of the felicitous and marvelous colloquy
between Keshav and Arjun transports me, O King (Dhritrashtr),
to sublime joy time after time.??
We too can experience Sanjay?s bliss if we remember the sacred
dialogue with perfect contentment. Sanjay then recalls the Lord?s
miraculous bearing and speaks of it.
meÀeÙe GJeeÛe-
FlÙenb JeemegosJemÙe heeLe&mÙe Ûe cenelceve:~
mebJeeoefcececeßeew<eceÆgleb   jescen<e&Ceced~~74~~
JÙeemeØemeeoeÛÚÎleJeevesleûg¢ecenb     hejced~
Ùeesieb ÙeesiesÕejelke=â<Ceelmee#eelkeâLeÙele: mJeÙeced~~75~~
jepevmebmce=lÙe mebmce=lÙe mebJeeoefcececeÆgleced~
kesâMeJeepeg&veÙees: hegCÙeb ù<Ùeeefce Ûe cegngceg&ng:~~76~~
saájaya uvÂca-
ityahaØ vÂsudevasya pÂrthasya ca mahÂtmanaÉ |
saØvÂdamimamaïrauîamadbhutaØ romaharîaàam ||74
vyÂsaprasÂdÂcchrutavÂnetadguhyamahaØ param |
yogaØ yogeïvarÂtkçîàÂtsÂkîÂtkathayataÉ svayam ||75
rÂjansaØsmçtya saØsmçtya saØvÂdamimamadbhutam|
keïavÂrjunayoÉ puàyaØ hçîyÂmi ca muhurmuhuÉ ||76

Yatharth Geeta 434
77. ?Recalling the amazing visage of the Lord again and again,
O King, I am lost in wonder and ecstasy over and over.??
Sanjay?s rapture can be ours, too, if we incessantly keep in our
minds the aspect of the cherished end.
That brings us to the last verse of the Geeta in which Sanjay
states his final conclusion.78. ?Good fortune, conquest, splendour, and steadfast wisdom
abide wherever are Lord Krishn and the noble archer Arjun:
such is my conviction.?
 Intent contemplation and firm restraint of the senses are Arjun?s
bow-the legendary Gandeev. So it is that Arjun is a sage who meditates
with equanimity. So wherever Yogeshwar Krishn and he are, there toodwell the triumph after which there is no defeat, the magnificence ofGod, and the firmness of resolve that enables one to be constant in thisinconstant world. Such is the well-deliberated judgement of Sanjay, ofthe seer who is gifted with celestial vision.
The great archer Arjun is no longer amidst us. But were steadfast
wisdom and the glory that comes with spiritual conquest for him alone?The teachings of Bhagwad Geeta belonged to a certain time, namelythe age that is known as Dwapar. This does not mean, however, thatArjun?s realization of the truth of God came to an end with the ceasingof his time. Yogeshwar Krishn has assured us repeatedly that he abidesin the realm of the heart. He exists within all of us. He is also withinyou. Arjun is a symbol of affectionate devotion, which is but anothername of the mind?s inclination and dedication to the cherished goal. If aworshiper is endowed with such devotion, perpetual triumph against thedemeaning properties of nature is assured. With such devotion there
leÛÛe mebmce==lÙe mebmce=lÙe ¤hecelÙeÆgleb njs:~
efJemceÙees ces ceneved jepevù<Ùeeefce Ûe hegve: hegve:~~77~~
Ùe$e ÙeesiesÕej: ke=â<Cees Ùe$e heeLeex OevegOe&j:~
le$e ßeerefJe&peÙees YetefleOeÇg&Jee veereflece&eflece&ce~~78~~
tacca saØsmçtya saØsmritya röpamatyadbhutaØ hareÉ|
vismayo me mahÂnrÂjanhçîyÂmi ca punaÉ punaÉ ||77
yatra yogeïvaraÉ kçîào yatra pÂrtho dhanurdharaÉ |
tatra ïrÍrvijayo bhötirdhruvÂ nÍtirmatirmama ||78||

Chapter 18 435
must also always necessarily be steadfast wisdom. Rather than being
confined to a certain place, time or individual, these attainments areuniversal - forever and for all. So long as beings exist, God must dwellin their hearts and the Soul must impatiently hunger for the SupremeBeing; and he who is affectionately devoted to God will attain to Arjun?sstatus. Every one of us can, therefore, aspire hopefully to the ultimatebliss of direct perception of God.
???????????????
At the beginning of the eighteenth, the concluding chapter of the
Geeta, Arjun wishes to be enlightened on the similarity as well as thedistinction between relinquishment and renunciation. In response to thisLord Krishn cites four prevalent creeds. While many savants style theabandonment of all action as renunciation, several others employ theterm to designate the giving up of desired action. Many scholarsadvocate the forsaking of all deeds since all of them are flawed, butothers are convinced that deeds such as yagya, penance, and charityought not to be relinquished. One of these beliefs was right, too, andLord Krishn has pronounced a similar judgement, which is that yagya,penance, and charity must never be forsaken, for they bring deliveranceto men of discernment. So fostering them while also giving upunrighteous impulses that are inimical to them is true renunciation. Suchrenunciation is perfect. But relinquishment with a desire for some profitin exchange is tainted by passion and moral blindness; and it is definitelyevil when the prescribed deed is forsaken out of self-deception.Renunciation is the crowning point of resignation. Performance of theprescribed task and the rapture that results from meditation are indeedvirtuous, while sensual pleasure is an outcome of infatuation. And thepleasure in which there is no prospect whatsoever of the ultimate unionwith God undoubtedly issues forth from ignorance.
All deeds, whether done in accordance with scripture or against,
are brought into being by five causes: the mind that is the doer, thevarious agents by which a deed is executed, the numerous desires all

Yatharth Geeta 436
of which cannot be fulfilled, the indispensable power that upholds, and
providence-the merits and demerits that have been harvested from thedeeds of previous births. These are the five causes that effect all actions.Irrespective of this, however, there are men who believe that the perfectGod is the doer. Such men are doubtlessly of immature judgement andunaware of truth. But, whereas Lord Krishn affirms in the chapter thatGod does not act, he has also exhorted Arjun earlier to but stand as aproxy since he (Lord Krishn) is the one who acts and determines.
Lord Krishn?s true message refers to the line of gravity that
separates nature from man. So long as a man lives within nature, he isdominated by maya, God?s ?divine consort? and the mother of all materialobjects. But no sooner has he risen above nature and given himself upto the final emancipation than he comes under the reign of God whonow rises in his heart like a charioteer. Arjun belongs to the category ofsuch men and so does Sanjay. For others too there is the prescribedway by which they can break free from the tenacious attraction of nature.The stage following upon this is the one at which the guiding impulsecomes from God himself. The impetus for the ordained action arisesfrom the confluence of an all knowing sage, the right way of acquiringknowledge, and the Supreme Being who is the one object that ought tobe known. So it is that it is an essential requirement for the seeker totake some sage as his teacher-preceptor.
For the fifth time in the Geeta, in the chapter Lord Krishn also
reverts to the four-fold organization of men into classes (varn). Deedsthat enable the Soul to become one with God, such as overcoming thesenses, restraint of the mind, intentness, tuning the body, speech, andmind to the coveted end through self-mortification, and generation ofdivine awareness as well as of the readiness to adhere to God?sdirections-constitute the province of the Brahmin class. Prowess,unwillingness to retreat, mastery of impulses, and possession of therequired skill for undertaking action-are all duties of the Kshatriy class.Care of the senses and promotion of spiritual plenty are innate obligationsof the Vaishy class, while ministering to the needs of the spiritually

Chapter 18 437
adept is the calling of the Shudr class. Rather than alluding to any
particular caste or tribe, ?Shudr? only denotes the unenlightened man-the man who sits in meditation for two hours without really availinghimself of even ten minutes of that time. It is true that his body ismotionless, but the mind which has to be stilled ranges wildly all thewhile. Rendering service to men of a higher spiritual status-to somenoble mentor-is the means by which a seeker like this can liberate hisSelf. Little by little, merits will then be engendered in him, too, and hisworship set in motion. This unenlightened man?s accomplishment mustnecessarily, therefore, commence with rendering service. The action isonly one, the ordained action-meditation, It is its practitioners who aredivided into the four-excellent, good, medium, and inferior-categories ofBrahmin, Kshatriy, Vaishy, and Shudr. So it is not society but actionthat has been divided into four classes on the basis of innate properties.Such is the character of varn postulated by the Geeta.
Elucidating the nature of reality, Lord Krishn promises that he will
instruct Arjun in the mode of that ultimate achievement which is thecrowning point of knowledge. The worshiper is competent to perceiveGod, when his wisdom, disinterest, self-control, fortitude, uninterruptedcontemplation, and inclination to the meditative process-all attributesthat enable the Soul to merge in the Supreme Being-are fully fledged;while at the same time afflictions such as desire, anger, delusion,fondness, and malice that hurl the Soul down into the ravines of natureare rendered inert.
This ability moulds the intent devotion that turns its eyes away
from everything except the cherished goal. And it is only by suchdevotion that the worshiper gains awareness of reality. God alone isreal and when the worshiper knows him and the celestial qualities ofwhich he is possessed-that he is ineffable, eternal, and immutable-heat once comes to dwell in that God. So the essence is this ultimatereality rather than five or twenty-five elements. With the completion ofworship the Soul is united with this essence and endowed with its sublimeattributes.

Yatharth Geeta 438
Lord Krishn further instructs Arjun that God, the ultimate reality,
abides in the hearts of all beings. But men are unaware of this because,
seated on the vehicle of maya, they stray and wander. So Arjun isexhorted to find shelter under the God who dwells in his heart. He oughtto take refuge with all his mind, acts, and speech in Lord Krishn. If hebut renounces all other obligations, their merits too will all be bestowedon him. And as an outcome of this abandonment he will attain to LordKrishn. This is the most secret knowledge that must never be impartedto one who is spiritually unworthy of receiving it. On the other hand,however, it is imperative to pass it on to truly devout men. Niggardlinessin this respect is meanness, for how can the devotee be saved withoutthis knowledge? At the end Lord Krishn inquires if Arjun has listenedattentively to his discourse, and whether he is rid of ignorance. Arjun?sreply to this is that his illusion is dispelled and his discernment restored.He admits that what the Lord has told him is the truth and that he shallabide by his teachings.
Sanjay, who has heard the dialogue equally well, concludes that
whereas Lord Krishn is the Supreme Yogeshwar-Lord of yog, Arjun is asage-a man with a noble Soul. He is engulfed in wave after wave of joyas he recalls their colloquy. So we too should always bring our minds tobear upon the Supreme Spirit. Constant meditation on God isindispensable. Wherever Yogeshwar Krishn and the sage Arjun are,there too are magnificence, success, and steadfastness of resolve likethe unshaken firmness of the Polar star. The ways of world that aretoday may change tomorrow. God alone is changeless. So the trulysteadfast resolve is also that which enables the seeker to approach theimmutable God. If Lord Krishn and Arjun are taken as mere historicalcharacters belonging to a certain age known as Dwapar, they are nolonger with us today. Does it mean, however, that there is now neitherconquest nor achievement for us? If that be so, the Geeta is of novalue to us. But such is not the case. Lord Krishn -an adept in yog-andArjun-a sage with tender, affectionate devotion-are forever. They havealways been and they will always be. Introducing himself, Lord Krishn

Chapter 18 439
says that although he is ineffable, the Supreme Being to whom he has
attained dwells in the realm of all hearts. He has always abided thereand he always will, and we all have to seek shelter under him. A sage isbut a man who looks for this sanctuary. He is an affectionate devoteeas Arjun is. So it is vital to seek refuge in a sage who is aware of theessence, for only he can provide the requisite impulse.
This chapter also sheds light on the nature of renunciation. The
resigning, of all one has, is renunciation. Merely putting on of a certainkind of attire is not renunciation. Absorption in the ordained deed, whileleading a life of seclusion, with a due appraisal of one?s own strength orwith a sense of self-surrender, is inescapable. Renunciation is the nameof the abandonment of all action along with consummation, and so buta synonym for the final deliverance. That absolution is the crowningpoint of renunciation.
Thus concludes the Eighteenth Chapter, in the Upanishad of
Shreemadbhagwadgeeta, on the Knowledge of the Supreme
Spirit, the Science of Yog, and the Dialogue between
Lord Krishn and Arjun, entitled:
?Sanyas Yog??
or
??The Yog of Renunciation??.
Thus concludes the Most Revered Paramhans Paramanand Ji?s
disciple Swami Adgadanand?s exposition of the Eighteenth
Chapter of the Shreemadbhagwadgeeta in ??Yatharth Geeta??,
entitled: ?Sanyas Yog??.
HARI OM TAT SAT

Summary 441
SUMMARY
Interpreters usually endeavour to hit upon something novel. But
truth is, of course, truth. It is neither ever new, nor does it ever grow
old. Fresh issues that find a place in newspaper columns are buttemporary events that emerge one day and disappear on the next. Butsince truth is immutable and permanent, it is always what it is. If oneventures forth to change or modify it, he has evidently not known truth.So all sages who have trodden the path of seeking and reached thesupreme goal cannot but proclaim the same truth. So they do not sowdissension between man and man. One who attempts to do so isevidently ignorant of truth. What Lord Krishn has revealed in the Geetais the same as sages coming earlier than him had known and whichsages to come hereafter shall speak of if they have known it.
SAGES AND THEIR SPIRITUAL LINE OF ACTION:  SAGES
pave and widen the felicitous path by opposing misconceptions andblind customs that but seem like truth and proliferate in its garb. Thishas been a vital need since the beginning, for many divergent wayscome into being with the passage of time. So deceptively like truth dothey appear that it is almost impossible to distinguish them from realityand assert that it is so. But since realized sages dwell in the essence,they can recognize ways that are at variance with it. They are capableof representing truth in a definitive form and prompting other men to itspursuit. This is what all seer prophets-Ram, Mahabir, Buddh, Jesus,and Muhammad-have done. And so it was with the more recent Tulsidas,Kabir, and Guru Nanak. Deplorably, however, after a sage has departedfrom the world, instead of following the path shown by him, his followersgradually begin to revere and worship such physical objects as theplaces of his birth and death or the spots he had frequented during hislife. In other words, they proceed to idolize the great Soul. Their memoryof the sage is indeed sharp and strong at the beginning, but it getsblurred with time, and men come increasingly under the sway of

Yatharth Geeta 442
misguided and false notions that finally crystallize into stupid, irrational
practices.
Many such misguided customs, claiming to represent truth, had
flourished in Yogeshwar Krishn?s time, too. Being a realized sage whohad perceived the highest spiritual reality, he opposed these false creedsand thus fulfilled his given obligation of bringing men back to the path ofrighteousness. Doesn?t he tell Arjun in the sixteenth verse of Chapter 2that ?The unreal has no being and the real has no non-being; and thetruth about both has also been seen by men who know the reality?? Theunreal has no existence while, on the other hand, the real is never non-existent. Lord Krishn also admits at the same time that he is not sayingthis as an incarnation of God: he is only saying what has also beenaffirmed by other sages who realized the truth of the Soul?s identity withthe all-pervading Supreme Spirit. His account of the human body as asphere of action (kshetr) and of the one who grows spiritually dexterousby subduing it (kshetragya) is akin to what has also often been professedby other great men of discernment. Elucidating the essence ofrelinquishment and renunciation in Chapter 18, Lord Krishn singles outone of the four differing creeds prevailing at his time and defends it.
RENUNCIATION:  At Lord Krishn?s time, too, there existed a sect,
the members of which boasted of being renunciates because they didnot kindle fire and had even given up meditation. As against this, LordKrishn has asserted that there is no provision for abandonment of theordained action on either the Way of Knowledge or the Way of Devotion.The enjoined task has to be set upon. This is an inescapable necessity.By constant and resolute practice the act of worship is progressivelyrefined and finally rendered so subtle that will and desire are completelysubdued and stilled. True renunciation is only this total cessation of willand desire, and there is no sacrifice earlier than this accomplishmentthat could be called renunciation. In chapter after chapter (2, 3, 5, 6),and especially in the final chapter, it is underlined that no man becomesa yogi- a selfdenier- by just not lighting fire or by relinquishment ofaction.

Summary 443
KARM (ACTION): Much has been said about delusions and we are
confronted by them, too, in regard to ACTION. The Geeta sheds light
on how these misconceptions come into being. Lord Krishn tells Arjunin the thirty-ninth verse of Chapter 2 that both the Way of Knowledgeand Discernment and the Way of Selfless Action can effectively severthe fetters of action as well as of its consequence. Practicing them ineven small measures successfully liberates one from the terror of birthand death. In both the ways the resolute deed is one, the mind is one,and the direction is also one. But ignorant minds are riddled with endlesscontradictions. In the guise of accomplishing action they inventnumerous deeds, rites, and ceremonies. But these are not true actionand Arjun is exhorted to undertake only the action that is ordained. Thisaction is an appointed course and it is that which brings to an end thebody which has been journeying through one birth to another since timeimmemorial. This journey can by no means be said to have terminatedif the Soul has to undergo yet another birth.
YAGYA (SACRIFICE): This one action - the ordained action - is
YAGYA. Lord Krishn has explicitly told Arjun in the ninth verse of Chapter3: ?Since the conduct of yagya is the only action and all other businessin which people are engaged are only forms of worldly bondage, O sonof Kunti, be unattached and do your duty to God well.? True action isthat which frees the Self from shackles of the world. But what preciselyis this deed, the undertaking of yagya, which effects the accomplishmentof action? In Chapter 4, Lord Krishn has elucidated yagya in more thana dozen ways which are collectively but a portrayal of the mode thatprovides access to the Supreme Being. In fact, all the different formsof yagya are internal processes of contemplation: forms of worship thatrender God manifest and known. Yagya is thus the special, ordainedmeans by which a worshiper traverses the path that leads to God. Themeans by which this appointed task is accomplished-regulation andserenity of breath, meditation, reflection, and restraint of the senses-constitute action. Lord Krishn has also made it clear that yagya hasnothing to do with non-spiritual matters and that the yagya which is

Yatharth Geeta 444
performed by means of material objects is indeed contemptible. It is so
even if we offer sacrifices worth millions. True yagya is performed byinternal operations of the mind and senses. Knowledge is theconsciousness of the immortal essence that ensues from yagya at itssuccessful completion. Yogi who are blessed with this transcendentalawareness become one with God. And once the goal that had to beachieved is reached, there is no need for any further action by theliberated Soul, for all action merges into the knowledge that is gainedfrom direct perception of the ultimate essence. The liberation of theSoul is thus also liberation from action.
The Geeta speaks of no action other than this appointed action-
the yagya that achieves God-realization. This has been repeatedlyemphasized by Lord Krishn. It is yagya which he has named the ?ordainedtask?-the deed that is worth doing-in the opening verse of Chapter 6. Itis further pointed out in Chapter 16 that the undertaking of yagyacommences in the real sense only after lust, anger and greed havebeen completely forsaken (verse 21). The more a man is absorbed inworldly business, the more tempting do desire, anger, and greed appearto him. In Chapters 17 and 18, too, while dwelling upon the task that isappointed, worthy and righteous, Lord Krishn has affirmed over andover that this one ordained action is the most propitious.
Unfortunately, however, in spite of Lord Krishn?s repeated warning
we persist in assuming that whatever we do in the world is ?action?. Andthat there is no need for any relinquishment. All that is needed for ourdeeds to be selfless is that we should not aspire after fruits of labour.We erroneously persuade ourselves that the Way of Action isaccomplished by just our undertaking a task with a sense of obligation,or that the Way of Renunciation is achieved by a mere surrender ofwhatever we do to God. Similarly, no sooner is the question of yagyabroached than we fabricate the five ?great sacrifices? such as offeringoblations to all beings (bhoot yagya) or water libations to departedancestors, or sacrifices to fire to appease superior gods like Vishnu,and promptly rush to perform them loudly chanting ?swaha?: Had Lord

Summary 445
Krishn not made a specific pronouncement in regard to yagya, we should
have been at liberty to follow the dictates of our will. But it is a demandof wisdom that we obey what is laid down in scripture. Yet we obstinatelyrefuse to act upon Lord Krishn?s precepts because of the sinful legacyof numerous misguided customs and creeds as well as modes of worshipthat we have inherited and which bind our minds in chains of ignorance.We can run away from material possessions, but the preconceptionsthat lurk in our minds and hearts pursue us wherever we go. And if weever deign to abide by Lord Krishn?s teachings, we cannot help distortingthem into the shape of our deluded, pre-conceived notions. The Sanskrit,in which the Geeta is embodied and set forth is so simple and lucid. Ifwe but make a patient and careful perusal of its syntax and the etymologyof its words, we can understand most of the Geeta by ourselves.
YUDDH (WAR): If we but understand the nature of yagya and action,
we will also easily comprehend the other issues raised in the Geeta,the issues of WAR, of the four-part organization of action, of varnsankar,and of the Way of Knowledge as well as the Yog of Action. That meansthe entire message of the Geeta. Arjun did not wish to fight. He castaway his bow and sat down despondently in the rear of his chariot. Byimparting the knowledge of action to him, then, Lord Krishn not onlyconvinced him of its validity but also induced him to take up his appointedtask. Since Arjun is exhorted to take up arms and fight in almost ascore of verses, doubtlessly there was a war. But there is not a singleverse in the whole of the Geeta which approves of physical slaughterand bloodshed. This is clearly seen from Chapters 2, 3, 11, 15, and 18,because the action that is stipulated in all of them without exception isthe deed that is ordained and performed through solitary meditation,and in which the mind is reined in from all objects other than the cherishedgoal. If such is the nature of action envisioned in the Geeta, the questionof physical warfare simply does not arise. If the propitious way revealedby the Geeta is only for those who wish to fight wars, we had betterkeep it aside. In fact, Arjun?s predicament is one that confronts all ofus. His grief and indecision were there in the historical past and they

Yatharth Geeta 446
are with us even today. When we try to restrain our mind and concentrate
with all our being, we are shaken by such infirmities as desire, anger,
infatuation, and disenchantment. To fight these maladies and destroy
them is war. Wars have been and are being fought in the world, but thepeace resulting from them is incidental and transitory. True and lasting
peace is won only when the Self has attained the state of immortality.
This is the only peace after which there is no disquiet, and it can beachieved only by accomplishing the ordained action.
VARN:  It is the action, rather than mankind, that Yogeshwar Krishn
has divided into four VARN or classes. Generally people sit forcontemplations. Some of them are capable of restraining the movement
of inhalation and exhalation of breath, while others in the beginning sit
for two hours but do not succeed in doing deep meditation even for tenminutes. Such worshiper with inadequate knowledge is at the Shudr
stage. So it is incumbent on him to begin his quest with rendering of
service as required by his native ability, for thus alone can theproficiencies of the Vaishy, Kshatriy, and Brahmin spiritual stages be
gradually inculcated in him. Thus only will he be enabled to ascend
step by step. At the other end, the Brahmin too is flawed because he isyet distant from God. And, after he has merged with that Supreme
Being, he ceases to be a Brahmin. ?Varn? denotes ?form?. A man?s form
is not his body but his inborn disposition. Lord Krishn tells Arjun in thethird verse of Chapter 17 : ?Since the faith of all men, O Bharat, is
according to their inherent propensity and man is essentially reverent,
he is what his faith is: ?Every man?s character is moulded by his faithand the faith is according to his dominant property. Varn is thus a scale,
a yardstick, to measure one?s capacity for action. But with the passing
of time we either grew oblivious of or discarded the appointed action,began to decide social status by heredity-thus treating varn as caste,
and laid down rigid occupations and modes of living for different men.
This is social classification, whereas the classification made in theGeeta is spiritual. Moreover, they who have thus twisted the meaning
of varn have also distorted the implications of action so as to protect
their hollow social standing and economic privileges. With the passage

Summary 447
of time, thus, varn came to be determined by birth alone. But the Geeta
makes no such provision. Lord Krishn says that he was the creator ofthe fourfold varn. Are we to assume from this that there was creationwithin the boundaries of India alone, for castes such as ours cannot befound anywhere else in the world? The number of our castes andsubcastes is beyond counting. Does this mean that Lord Krishn haddivided men into classes? The definitive answer to this is found in thethirteenth verse of Chapter 4, where, he declares: ?I have created thefour classes (varn) according to innate properties and action.? So hehas classified action, not men, on the basis of inherent properties. Themeaning of varn will be understood without difficulty if we have graspedthe significance of action, and the import of varnsankar will be clear if we
have comprehended what varn is.
VARNSANKAR (HYBRIDISM):  One who deviates from the way
of ordained action is VARNSANKAR. The true varn of the Self is Godhimself. So to stray from the path that takes the Self to God and to belost in the wilderness of nature is to be varnsankar. Lord Krishn hasrevealed that no one can attain to that Supreme Spirit without settingupon the way of action. Sages of accomplishment who are emancipatedneither gain from undertaking action nor lose by forsaking it. And yetthey engage in action for the good of mankind. Like these sages, thereis nothing that Lord Krishn has not achieved, but he yet continues tolabour diligently for the sake of men who lag behind. If he does notperform his given task well and earnestly, the world will perish and allmen will be varnsankar (3:22-24). Illegitimate children are said to beborn when women turn adulterous, but Lord Krishn affirms that allmankind is under the threat of falling into the varnsankar state if thesages who dwell in God refrain from fulfilling their obligation. If thesesages desist from the performance of their assigned task, theunaccomplished will imitate them, discontinue worship, and foreverwander in the maze of nature. They will thus become varnsankar, forthe immaculate God and the state of actionlessness can be achievedonly by an undertaking of the ordained action.

Yatharth Geeta 448
GYANYOG AND KARMYOG (WAY OF KNOWLEDGE AND
WAY OF ACTION): The appointed action is only one, the action
that we call worship or meditation. But there are two ways of approaching
it: the WAY OF KNOWLEDGE and the WAY OF SELFLESS ACTION.Engaging in the deed with a proper evaluation of one?s ability, as wellas of the profit and loss involved in the enterprise, is the Way ofKnowledge. The one who traverses this path is conscious of what he istoday, what change there is going to be in his role on the next day, andthat he will ultimately reach the aspired-for goal. Since he proceedswith a due awareness and understanding of his situation, this wayfareris called a rover over the Way of Knowledge. But the man who steps onthe Way of Selfless Action commences his undertaking with a totalreliance on the adored teacher. This seeker leaves the questions ofprofit and loss to his mentor?s discretion. So this is also the Way ofDevotion. What is worth noting, however, is that the initial impulse inboth cases comes from a noble teacher. Enlightened by the same sage,while one of the pupils embarks on the prescribed task with self-reliance,the other does it by surrendering himself to the mercy of his teacher.So it is that Yogeshwar Krishn tells Arjun that the ultimate essence thatis secured by the Way of Knowledge is also achieved by the Way ofSelfless Action. The seeker who perceives the two as identical is theone who knows reality. The seer who declares both actions as one isLord Krishn and the action, too, in both cases is one. Treaders on bothpaths have to relinquish desire and the outcome of the two disciplinesis also one. Only the attitudes with which this action is undertaken aretwo.
ONE GOD: The ordained task is an internal process of the mind and
senses, how fitting is it to build external places of worship such astemples and mosques, and to adore idols of symbolic representationsof gods and goddesses? Ideally Hindus are followers of the eternaltruths of Sanatan Dharm- values and virtues that awaken the immutable,eternal God within man?s heart and thus enable him to realize his Self.Pursuing and delving deep into the eternal truths, their forebearers had

Summary 449
disseminated their insights and revelations all over the world -
irrespective of the part of the earth he hails from. One who treads thepath of reality is essentially a believer in the eternal truth, SanatanDharm. Overridden by desires, however, Hindus have gradually lostsight of reality and become victims of a host of misconceptions. LordKrishn emphatically warns Arjun that there are no entities like gods.Whatever be the power a man devotes himself to, it is God who standsbehind the object of his adoration to reward him. It is God who sustainsall worship, for he is all-pervading. Truly, therefore, the worship of othergods is unlawful and its fruits are perishable. Only those ignorant menwhose minds have been held to ransom by desires worship other godsand their objects of worship vary according to their native inclinations.While gods are the object of adoration by good and virtuous men, demonsand yaksh are worshiped by those who are given to passion and moralblindness, ghosts and spirits are venerated by men of ignorance. Manyof these worshipers even subject themselves to severe and grievousausterities. But, as Lord Krishn enlightens Arjun, all such worshipers ofimproper objects impair not only their physical beings but also God whodwells within them. Such worshipers should, therefore, be deemed assurely possessed of an unrighteous, evil disposition. Since God abidesin the hearts of all beings, it is binding on everyone that he takes refugein him alone. The true place of worship is, therefore, not external butwithin the realm of heart. Yet people are drawn towards and worshipeven such unworthy objects as rock, water, mere structures of brickand mortar, and a host of inferior divinities. To these objects they alsosometimes add an idol of Lord Krishn.
What an irony that even followers of Buddhism, who lay such
great stress on Lord Krishn?s teachings, have sculpted images of theirmentor Buddh who had all his life condemned idolatry. They have forgottenthe words spoken by their noble teacher to his beloved pupil Anand:?Waste not your time on the worship of one who is in the state of being.?
This is not to insist, however, that places and objects of divine
adoration like temples, mosques, churches, seats of pilgrimage, idols,

Yatharth Geeta 450
and monuments have no value whatsoever. Most significantly they keep
alive memories of bygone seers so that people may constantly remembertheir ideals and achievements. Among these sages there have beenwomen as well as men. Sita, Janak?s daughter, had been a Brahmin girlin her previous life. At her father?s prompting, she had subjected herselfto rigorous penance, but success had yet eluded her. In her next life,however, she was rewarded when she achieved union with Ram andcame to be revered as immaculate (like God himself) and immortal,and as maya-God?s ?divine consort?. Meera had a royal birth, but therewas an awakening of devotion to God in her heart, too. Struggling againstwith many hurdles she at last emerged triumphant. Shrines andmonuments have been erected to commemorate her, so that thecommunity may imbibe spiritual life from her pious example. Be it Meeraor Sita, or any other visionary who has sought for and perceived reality,each of them is an ideal for us and we should follow their footsteps. Butwhat greater folly can be there than assuming that we have dischargedour moral obligation by merely offering flowers and applying sandal pasteto these exemplars?
If we but look at some relic of one whom we regard as an ideal,
we are overwhelmed by the sentiment of loving devotion. This is as itshould be, for it is only by the inspiration provided by him and by hisguidance that we can move ahead on our spiritual journey. It should beour purpose to advance step by step towards the point where we becomewhat our ideal is. This is true worship. However, although it is right thatwe do not in any way slight our ideals, we shall be guilty of strayingfrom our goal and be wide off our mark if we complacently believe thatoffering of leaves and flowers is all that is needed for achievement ofthe propitious end.
As for gaining wisdom from our ideals and acting upon it, whatever
we call them-a hermitage, monastery, temple, mosque, church, math,vihar or gurudwara, each one of them does have its merit provided it ismarked by genuine spiritual concern. Whose memory or image isconsecrated in these monuments? What was his accomplishment? What

Summary 451
penances did he go through for it? How did he make his attainment? It
is to learn the answers to these questions that we should go to centersof worship and pilgrimage. But these centers are profitless if they cannotenlighten us by example on the steps by which some accomplishedSoul had finally reached his goal. They are also of no value if theycannot present us with a setup that is truly propitious. In that case allthey can offer us is some blind, established creed or practice. If it is so,we doubtlessly cause ourselves harm by frequenting them. Thesecenters of worship had originally come up to obviate the arduousnecessity of individuals going from one place to another for instructionsand preachings, and to replace it with collective religious discourses.But in the course of time idolatry and irrational adherence to entrenchedconventions supplanted dharm and gave rise to innumerable misguidednotions.
GRANTH (SACRED BOOKS):  SACRED BOOKS are useful in
the same way as monuments and places that remind us of the idealsand achievements of some departed sage. They tell us of the dynamicspiritual process which Yogeshwar Krishn calls the ordained action inorder that we may know and be inclined to undertake it. In case we areovertaken by loss of remembrance sometimes, we go back to theseworks to refresh our memory. But these sacred books are of absolutelyno avail if we just sprinkle grains of rice and sandal-paste on them andthen relegate them to a high shelf. A noble work like the Geeta is amarker - a sign, that directs us along the right path and provides supportright up to the time when the destination is reached. We look up to holybooks so that we may constantly advance towards the cherished goal.But after the heart has once seized it, the goal itself is transformed intoa book. Veneration of noble memories is desirable, but a blind worshipof them is deplorable.
DHARM:  According to Lord Krishn (2/16-29), the unreal never exists
and the real is never without existence at any time. God alone is real,permanent, indestructible, changeless, and eternal, but he is beyond

Yatharth Geeta 452
thought, imperceptible, and quite above the flutterings of mind. Now the
point is how to restrain the mind? Action is the name of the mode bywhich a man attains to God after subduing his mind. Putting this modeinto practice is dharm, which is a trust or obligation. As Lord Krishn hastold Arjun in the fortieth verse of Chapter 2: ?Since selfless action neitherwears out the seed from which it sprang nor has any adverseconsequence, even a partial observance of it liberates one from thedire terror of repeated birth and death.? So the undertaking of this actionis dharm.
This appointed action has been classified into four categories on
the basis of the seekers? inherent ability. At the initial stage, when aman sets upon the way of seeking after a due understanding of histask, he is a Shudr. But he is elevated to the rank of a Vaishy when hishold upon the means gets steadier. At the third stage, the same worshiperis promoted to the yet higher status of a Kshatriy when he gains theability to oppose the conflicts of nature. The awakening of true knowledgethat is transmitted by the voice of God himself, and which bestows onone, the ability to rely upon that God and become like him, transmutesthe seeker into a Brahmin.
Hence Yogeshwar Krishn lays down in the forty-sixth verse of
Chapter 18 that engaging in action that is in harmony with one?s nativedisposition is swadharm. Though of an inferior merit, the discharge ofone?s natural obligation should be preferred. The undertaking of a deedof superior merit is, on the other hand, improper and injurious if it isattempted without cultivating the ability that is commensurate with it.Even losing one?s life in the fulfillment of one?s inborn calling is better,because the body is a mere garb and no one is really changed byputting on a different apparel. When taken up again, the spiritual exerciseis resumed from the same point at which it was discontinued. Thusclimbing from step to step, the seeker at last attains to the immortalstate.
The same is re-emphasized in the forty-seventh verse of the
concluding chapter, when it is said that a man attains to ultimate

Summary 453
liberation by worshiping God well according to his inborn inclination. In
other words, remembering and meditating on God by the appointed modeis dharm.
But who is the man entitled to this spiritual discipline called dharm?
Who has the privilege of approaching it? Shedding light on the problem,Lord Krishn tells Arjun that even the most degraded man is renderedvirtuous if he worships him (Lord Krishn)- the one God-with intentness,and his Soul is then merged with God who is the ultimate reality anddharm. So, according to the Geeta, that man is pious who performs theappointed task in keeping with his innate property to realize God.
Arjun is counselled at last to forsake all his other obligations and
seek refuge in Lord Krishn. So that man who is wholly devoted to oneGod is endowed with piety. To dedicate oneself thus to God is dharm.The process by which the Self is enabled to attain to the SupremeBeing is dharm. The awareness that comes to sages after their hungerfor union with God has been quenched because of their achievement ofthe ultimate state is the only reality in all of creation. So we have toseek refuge in these men of enlightenment and wisdom in order to learnhow we can make our way along the path that leads to final bliss. Thatpath is only one and embarking on it is dharm.
Dharm is an obligation-a sacred trust. It is propitious and the
mind that applies itself to this enjoined task is also one and unified.(2.41) Offering the functions of the senses and the operations of thelife-winds to the fire of yog - self-restraint kindled by the knowledge ofGod is dharm. (4.27) When self-control is identical with the Soul, andthe operations of breath and the senses are thoroughly stilled, the currentwhich arouses passions and the current that bears one towards Godmerge into one in the Self. Realization of God is the sublime culminationof this spiritual process.
CONVERSION OR PROSELYTIZATION: Delusions became so
rampant at the time of Muslim invasions in the Middle Ages that Hindusreally came to believe they would lose their dharm if they but ate a

Yatharth Geeta 454
handful of rice or drank a mouthful of water from the hands of an alien.
Convinced that they had been stripped of their dharm, thousands ofHindus took their own life. They knew well how to die for their dharm,but they had no awareness at all of what that dharm was. There was noconsciousness whatsoever of how the eternal, imperishable Soul,unsullied by any material object, could die by a mere touch. Even physicalbodies are killed by some weapon or the other, but Hindus were bereftof their dharm by mere touch. However, it was certainly not dharm thatwas destroyed. What really met with destruction was just a body ofmisconceptions. Mugisuddin, the kaji of Bayana, promulgated a lawduring the reign of Alauddin Khilaji that Muslims had the right to spitinto a Hindu?s mouth because the Hindu had no faith of his own and hewould be redeemed by a Muslim?s spittle. Mugisuddin was not reallyunjust in doing so. If spitting into a mouth could convert only one Hinduto Islam, spitting into wells converted thousands. The real tyrant of theage thus was not the alien invader, but the Hindu society itself.
Have they who have been converted, we may ask, gained dharm?
Conversion from one way of life to another is not dharm. Moreover, theproselytizers, too, were by no means men of dharm. At heart theproselytizers were even worse victims of certain misconceptions. Andit was such a pity that ignorant Hindus fell unheeding into the pitfalls ofthese delusions. In order to reform backward and ignorant tribes,Muhammad had laid down a framework of social order to regulatemarriage, divorce, inheritance, borrowing and lending, usury, evidence,oath-taking, atonement, occupation and living, and conduct. He hadalso forbidden idolatry, adultery and fornication, stealing, intoxicants,gambling, and certain kinds of improper marriages. But instead of beingdharm, all these measures were only an attempt at some sort of socialorganization by which the prophet had endeavoured to divert the lust-ridden society of his time towards his own teachings.
But, while this aspect of Muhammad?s teachings has always been
given prominence, little thought is given to his concept of dharm. Hehas laid it down that Allah holds to account the man, even a single

Summary 455
breath. of whose is bereft of consciousness of the Almighty, just as he
condemns a sinner for his iniquities, and the punishment for which isperpetual damnation. How many of us can sincerely claim that we havelived according to this ideal? Muhammad provided that the man whoharms none, not even beasts, is enabled to hear the voice of God. Thiswas said for all places and times. But the Prophet?s followers havechanged the import of the decree altogether by assigning a uniqueposition to the Grand Mosque at Mecca: it is here that one must notpluck a blade of grass, nor slaughter a beast, nor cause harm to anyone.Thus Muslims too have been caught in traps of their own making and itis more often than not forgotten that the Grand Mosque is but amonument to cherish and perpetuate the Prophet?s sacred memory.
Among others, the true import of Islam was understood by Tabrej,
by Mansour, by Iqbal. But they were all victimized and persecuted byreligious fanatics and bigots. And so was Socrates poisoned, allegedlyfor conspiring to convert people to atheism. Since Jesus toiled even onthe Sabbath and conferred vision on the blind, the same charge waslevelled against him and he was crucified. In India, even today, people,who earn their subsistence from a place of worship; a religious order orsect, or from a seat of pilgrimage, raise a great hue and cry that faith isimperiled, whenever a sage speaks of reality. They can only opposetruth and, do nothing else, because they regard its propagation as athreat to their livelihood. Like the persecutors of Socrates and Jesus,such so called religious people have also either forgotten or deliberatelyturned a blind eye to why a certain sacred memory had been preservedin a monument in the remote past.
THE RIGHT OF HOUSEHOLDERS: Since a sequestered life,
restraint of the senses, and constant reflection and meditation areessential requirements of the ordained action, it is often asked of whatuse the Geeta can be to HOUSEHOLDERS. That is like saying that theGeeta is only for ascetics-for men who have renounced the world andall. But this is not true. Although the Geeta is primarily for persons whotread the path of spiritual quest, it is also in good measure for those

Yatharth Geeta 456
who aspire to step on to it. This song of revelation is for all men, and it
is especially salutary for householders-for men and women who arerearing a family and struggling to support and sustain it, because suchindividuals stand at the point where action is commenced.
Lord Krishn tells Arjun that the initial step taken in the undertaking
of selfless action is never destroyed. Attempted in even a small measure,it at last provides liberation from the terror of birth and death. Now, whobesides an overburdened and harried householder is expected to act ina small measure? He has so little time to devote to the task. Arjun istold in the thirty-sixth verse of Chapter 4: ?Even if you are the mostheinous sinner, the ark of knowledge will carry you safely across allevils.? (4.36) Now, who possibly is expected to be the greater sinner,the man who is incessantly absorbed in spiritual seeking or the manwho only contemplates embarking on it? So the garhastya-order- theorder of the householder- is the stage that marks the beginning of action.In Chapter 6, Arjun asks the lord: ?What is the end, O Krishn, of thefeeble worshiper whose inconstant mind has strayed away from selflessaction and who has, therefore, been deprived of perception which is thefinal outcome of yog?? Is it that this deluded, shelter-less man isdissipated like scattered clouds, deprived of both God-realization andworldly pleasures? Lord Krishn then proceeds to assure his friend anddisciple that even this irresolute man who digresses from yog is notdestroyed, for one who has performed good deeds never comes togrief. With his sanskar, such a person is either born in the house of anoble man or admitted to the family of an enlightened yogi. Such aperson is thus on both ways induced to worship and, treading thisappointed path through several births, he or she finally achieves theultimate state. All this is relevant to a householder more than to anyoneelse. Isn?t a person in fact, re-born as a householder because ofwandering from the Way of Selfless Action? And this accident of birthis what bestows on that individual an inclination towards spiritual seekingand worship. In this context Lord Krishn further declares in the thirtiethverse of Chapter 9: ?Even if a man of the most depraved conduct worships

Summary 457
incessantly, he is worthy of being regarded as a saint because he is a
man of true resolve.? Who can be more fallen, the man who is alreadyabsorbed in divine adoration or the man who has not yet been initiatedinto the process? Even women, Vaishy, and Shudr, who are said by theignorant to be of inferior birth, Lord Krishn promises in the thirty-secondverse of the same chapter, attain to the Supreme goal by taking refugein God. Even persons of sinful conduct can achieve final emancipationby finding shelter under God. A householder is not essentially a sinfulman. Moreover, the order to which he belongs is, as we have alreadyseen, the starting point of the scripturally ordained action. Climbingever higher, although step by step, the householder will also achievethe state of a yogi and become a part of the supreme essence and,then, his form will be, as Yogeshwar Krishn says, like the form of Godhimself.
WOMEN: According to the Geeta the physical body is simply an
apparel, an attire. As a man casts off the old clothes and puts on a newdress; similarly the soul, the master of the worldly ingredients, castsoff the ravaged body and puts on a new one. You may be a male or afemale, it is meaningless because it is only an outer clothing.
There are two kinds of males in this world - perishable and
imperishable. The physical body acquired by every living being isperishable or subject to change. When the mind and the senses dissolvein Self (kutasth), then the same person is imperishable. Such a man(purush) never decays. This is the state of meditation or worship.
Respect and disrespect for women in the society go on waning
and waxing. But in the divine words of Geeta, shudr (ignorant) or vaishy(aware of the spiritual process) or any male or female whosoever hemight be, attains the Supreme State if he is under Lord Krishn?s shelter.So the importance of man or woman is the same in this spiritual journey.
MATERIALISTIC PROSPERITY:  It is not that the Geeta is quite
unconcerned with MATERIAL LIFE AND PROSPERITY. Lord Krishnpromises in verses 20-22 of Chapter 9: ?Men who do the pious deeds

Yatharth Geeta 458
enjoined by the three Ved, who have tasted nectar and freed themselves
from sin, and who wish for heavenly existence through worshiping meby yagya, go to heaven and enjoy godly pleasures for their virtuousacts.? It is said that God grants what the worshipers desire. After enjoyingthe joys of heaven, however, they have to return to the mortal world-theworld that is governed by the three properties. But since they abide inGod, the ultimate bliss, and are protected by him, they are neverdestroyed. It is also God who gradually liberates them by fulfilling theiryearning for enjoyment and thus setting them on to the way that leadsto the highest good.
KSHETR (THE FIELD):  The words of the Geeta which have been
delivered by God Himself, declares- Arjun! This physical body itself isthe ?kshetr? (field) (Geeta, 13/1) in which the seed sown of good or badkarm grows in the form of sanskar or imprints and with the passage oftime appears in life in the form of happiness or sorrows. The demonicproperties lead to mean, base or vile bodies; whereas the divineproperties lead to God, the Supreme Being. Under the guidance of theSadguru, the conclusive battle starts. This is the meaning of the battlebetween the field and the knower of the field.
The primary concern of sages is KSHETR-the sphere of internal
action. It is often advanced that there are two spheres of action, externaland internal. But this is not true for a sage. He speaks of only onesphere, although listeners may interpret him differently according totheir own individual predilections. It is thus that a single pronouncementis assigned various implications. But the Soul that has attained to LordKrishn?s state by gradually making his way on the path of worshipbeholds what was perceived by the Lord himself. He alone recognizesthe signs provided in the Geeta and know what really the Yogeshwarintended to say.
Not even one verse in the whole song of revelation is concerned
with the phenomena of external life. We all know what to eat and how todress ourselves. Dictated by time, place, and circumstance, variations

Summary 459
in mode of living, assumptions, and considerations that regulate social
behaviour are a gift from nature. So what provisions could Lord Krishnmake for them? If some societies adopt polygamy because their girlsoutnumber boys, others accept polyandry because there are fewer girls.What laws could Lord Krishn formulate for this? Some underpopulatednations exhort their people to have as many children as they can andreward them for this. In the Vedic Age in India it was prescribed that acouple must have at least ten children. But in the changed conditionsof today the ideal is one child or, at the most, two. Lesser the children,the fewer the problems of the country will be in this age of the crisis ofoverpopulation. Now, what rules could Lord Krishn lay down for this?
SHREY (THE BLISS):  There are no schools that impart instruction
in lust, anger, greed, and delusion to their pupils. And yet there areyoungsters who are better-versed in these vices than even their elders.What can Lord Krishn teach us in regard to this? There was a timewhen pupils were initiated into the Ved and trained in the martial skillsof archery and wielding maces. But no one cares to learn these thingstoday because ours is an age of automatic machines and self-propelledweapons. What can Lord Krishn say about these matters? Whatprovisions for the external, physical life can he possibly make? In theolden days, yagya was performed to invoke rains, but today we do it bymechanical means. In the past crops were almost wholly dependent onrains, but now there is artificial irrigation and we have the much vaunted?Green Revolution?. What can the Yogeshwar say about all this? That iswhy he has frankly admitted that bound and constrained by the propertiesof nature, the physical life of man grows and changes according tocircumstance. It is these properties that shape the different forms ofexternal life. Knowledge of the physical world has grown tremendouslyand bifurcated into numerous branches. But there is a reality thattranscends all this physical knowledge. It is always there with everyone of us, but unfortunately we are oblivious of it. We neither know itnor can recognize it. It is the memory, the awareness, of this sublimereality that slips from Arjun?s mind, but he recovers it by listening devoutly

Yatharth Geeta 460
to Lord Krishn?s sacred message that is enshrined in the Geeta. The
memory that comes back to Arjun is the memory of God who dwells inthe realm of every heart and is yet so far away. It is every man?s aspirationto approach that Supreme Essence, but he does not know the way.How unfortunate is it that we know all other ways but are ignorant of thisone, unique way that takes us to ultimate happiness? The shroud ofignorance, of not knowing, that envelops us is so thick that the mindfails to penetrate it and get at the truth. Conscious of the ignorance thatlies like a dense mantle over men?s minds, the Yogeshwar, knower ofman?s innermost secrets, has in his infinite grace illumined the hiddentruth in the Geeta for the enlightenment of all of us. The felicity offeredby the Geeta is its illumination of the hidden truth of God - for theenlightenment of mankind.
THE GIVER OF YOG: Yogeshwar Krishn - a noble teacher -preceptor-
is the GIVER OF YOG. As we have just seen, according to theYogeshwar, the knowledge of the way that leads to ultimate good, themeans of embarking on it, and of its attainment, is derived from a noblementor. Even roaming about from one holy place to another or similarother strenuous exertions cannot bring this knowledge within our reachin the absence of a teacher who can impart it to us. In the thirty-fourthverse of Chapter 4, Arjun is advised to obtain this knowledge fromsages through reverence, inquiry and guileless solicitation, for only thesewise Souls who are aware of the reality can initiate him into it. Closeproximity to an accomplished sage, asking him sincere questions, andrendering of humble service to him constitute the means of realization.Only by pursuing this course can Arjun finally bring his spiritual questto fruition. The vital importance of an accomplished teacher preceptoris again emphatically stated in Chapter 18: ?Whereas the way of securingknowledge, the worthwhile knowledge, and the knower constitute thethree-fold inspiration to action, the doer, the agents, and the deed itselfare the three-fold constituents of action.? According to Lord Krishn?sinjunction, therefore, an enlightened sage, rather than books, is theprimary medium by which action is accomplished. A book only offers a

Summary 461
formula and no illness is healed by memorizing the prescription: the
more important thing is its application-its practice.
HELL:  Giving an account of the property of ignorance, Lord Krishn
has pointed out in Chapter 16/16 that, misguided in numerous ways,enmeshed in the webs of attachment, and inordinately fond of sensualpleasure, men fall into the most defiled hell. Light is shed on the natureof this hell in the nineteenth verse of the same chapter when Lord Krishnsays: ?I forever condemn these abhorring, sinful, and cruel men, themost abject among mankind, to inferior births.? ignorant and wickedmen who entertain a feeling of hostility against God are perpetuallycondemned to repeated birth in lower forms of life. As for what takesone to this hell, it is declared in the same chapter that lust, anger, andgreed, all destructive of sanctity of the Self, are the three gateways tohell. It is these maladies, more than any others, that constitute thedevilish hoard. So hell, as visualized in the Geeta, is degradation torecurrent birth in base forms.
OBSEQUIAL OFFERINGS:  Along with his fear of destruction of
families in the impending war and the consequent birth of varnsankar(illegitimate) children, Arjun also gives vent to his apprehension that,deprived of OBSEQUIAL OFFERINGS, the departed Souls of ancestorswill fall from heaven. Thereupon Yogeshwar Krishn asks him how sucha delusion has come over him. Pronouncing that obsequial offeringsare but an instance of spiritual ignorance, the Lord points out that theSoul changes from a tattered, ravaged body to a new one just as a mandiscards worn out clothes to put on a new apparel. Since the physicalbody is mere clothing and, rather than dying, the Soul just changesfrom one apparel to another, who is it that we endeavour to appeaseand sustain by making all these obsequial offerings? That explains whyLord Krishn declares the practice an example of ignorance. Stressingthe same again, he adds in the seventh verse of Chapter 15: ?Theimmortal Soul in the body is a part of mine and it is he who draws thefive senses and the sixth-the mind-that dwell in nature: ?The Soul carries

Yatharth Geeta 462
along the properties and mode of the mind and five senses of the body
from which he departs and takes them into his new body. When thenext body, equipped with all the means of physical enjoyment, isimmediately assured to the Soul, to whom do we offer the obsequialflour-cakes and libations?
As the Soul discards its old body, it at once assumes another,
and there is no interruption between the two events. Imagining, therefore,that the Souls of our deceased ancestors of a thousand or moregenerations are lying somewhere waiting to be fed and offered drinksby their living descendants, as well as shedding tears of sorrow overthe fancied fall of these Souls from their non-existent heavenly abode,cannot but be an instance of ignorance.
SIN AND VIRTUE:  Numerous misconceptions also prevail in regard
to what is virtuous and what is impious: the righteous and the unrighteous.According to Yogeshwar Krishn, the man who is afflicted with themaladies of lust and anger that arise from the property of spiritualignorance, and whose hunger for carnal enjoyment is insatiable, is themost abject sinner. In other words, covetousness is the chief among allsins. Lust and desire, dwelling in the senses, mind and intellect, are thefountainhead of sin. Where do these desires dwell? Lord Krishn saidthat they dwell in senses, mind and intellect. No amount of washing thebody can make us clean if iniquity lurks within the mind.
Declaring that the mind and senses are purged by constant
remembrance and recitation of the name, by steady meditation, and byresigning oneself as well as rendering earnest service to some realized,accomplished sage who has grasped the essence, Lord Krishn urgesArjun, in the thirty-fourth verse of Chapter 4, to undertake these deeds.Arjun is exhorted to obtain the knowledge, into which all action is at lastmerged, from sages through reverence, inquiry, and innocent solicitation.This knowledge-awareness of the highest spiritual truth annihilates all sin.
The same idea is stated differently in Chapter 3 verse 13 when
Arjun is told that whereas wise men who partake of the food ensuing

Summary 463
from yagya are liberated from all sin, the impious who only covet
gratification of physical desires subsist on nothing but sin. Yagya is, aswe have seen, a certain process of meditation by which all influencesand impressions of the world-animate as well as inanimate-stored inthe mind are reduced to nothing. God is the only remnant that is leftbehind. So, while sin is that which engenders bodies, acts of pietyenable a man to realize the indestructible, eternal essence after whichthe Soul is freed from the compulsion of assuming yet another body.
Rid of wicked and conflicting passions, the doers of virtuous action
which brings the cycle of birth and death to an end worship and adorethe Supreme Spirit with an avowed resolve. Lord Krishn tells Arjun inthe twenty-ninth verse of Chapter 7: ?They who are aware of God, theidentity of the Supreme Spirit and the individual Soul, and of all action,find shelter under me and strive for liberation from the cycle of birth anddeath: ?They who know Lord Krishn, know the Supreme Being whoanimates all beings, all divinities, and yagya, and whose minds areabsorbed in him, come to know the God in Lord Krishn and are unitedwith him forever. Piety is, therefore, that which induces the Self to riseabove birth and death and all evils so as to know the eternal, immutablereality and forever dwell in it. By the same logic, that deed is sinfulwhich constrains the Self to go around and around within the boundariesof mortality, and of grief and spiritual sickness.
It is said again in Chapter 10 that the wise man, who knows Lord
Krishn?s essence as the birthless, eternal, and Supreme God of theentire world, is freed from all sins. It is only the direct perception ofGod, as we have been enlightened, that liberates the Soul from sin.
In brief, therefore, whereas that which effects repeated birth and
death is sin, the deed that prompts one towards God and begets theultimate repose is piety. While merits such as truthfulness, relying uponthe product of one?s own labour, regarding women with the lovingreverence that is felt for one?s own mother, and integrity are alsoimportant concomitants of virtue, true piety is of course the realizationof God. The man who offends against faith in God is a sinner.

Yatharth Geeta 464
SAGES ARE ONE:  Since truth is one, eternal, and changeless, as
a corollary ALL SAGES ARE ONE. Lord Krishn discloses to Arjun in
Chapter 4 that it was he who had taught the eternal yog to Vivaswat,the Sun-god. But no mention of the name of Lord Krishn is found in thepast history or scriptures before him. Actually Lord Krishn is Yogeshwar.The state he has attained to is therefore ineffable and imperishable.Whenever the spiritual exercise that unites one with God was set inmotion, it was initiated by some enlightened saint- be he a Ram or aZarathustra. The verities that Lord Krishn enunciates in the Geeta havealso characterized the teaching of seers like Jesus, Muhammad, andGuru Nanak in later times.
So all sages belong to one fraternity. They all converge at the
same point through their perception of the reality of God. The ultimategoal they arrive at is the same. There are many who venture along thepath of realization, but the ultimate bliss they attain to is the same if theprocess of their worship is successfully accomplished. After realizationthey exist as pure, immaculate Souls, while their bodies are turned intomere dwellings. Whoever belonging to this state has enlightened mankindis a Yogeshwar, a Lord of Yog (union).
Like all others a sage has to be born somewhere. But whether
such an individual is born in the East or West, among whatever race orcolour, among followers of some existing creed or barbarous tribes, oramong the poor or rich, the sage is unshackled by the establishedtraditions of the people among whom he or she is born. A sage ratherholds God as his supreme goal, sets upon the way that leads towardshim, and ultimately becomes what that Supreme Being is. So there canbe no distinctions of caste, class, colour or wealth in the teachings ofthe realized sage. A sage loses sight even of the physical difference ofthe sexes, male and female. For enlightened persons as it is pointedout in the sixteenth verse of Chapter 15, there are only two kinds ofbeings in all the world, the mortal and the immortal. Whereas the bodiesof all beings are destructible, their Souls are imperishable.

Summary 465
So it is regrettable that disciples of sages, coming in later times,
devise their own peculiar, narrow-minded creeds and dogmas. Whereas
the followers of one of these sages name themselves Jews, others callthemselves Christians or Muslims or Hindus. A sage is quiteunconcerned with such denominations and barriers. Such a person isabove community and caste. He or she is but a seer-a Soul ofenlightenment and realization, and any attempt to mix up with a socialsetup is an error.
No sage-teacher is, therefore, such an individual to be castigated
or spoken ill of, irrespective of among whom they are born or of anysectarian bias by which such a sage is venerated by members of acertain creed. The realized sage is impartial and so by denigrating sucha person we but sap the omniscient God who dwells within us, alienateourselves from him, and do injury to the Self. An accomplished sage isthus the one earnest benefactor we have in the world. Possessed ofknowledge and discernment, the sage alone can bestow the highestgood on us. So it is our primary duty to cultivate and cherish goodwillfor him or her and we only dupe ourselves if we deprive ourselves ofthis feeling of friendliness and reverence.
THE VED:  There are numerous allusions to VED in the Geeta, but the
sacred books of the Ved are altogether only milestones. The seekerhas no use for them after he has reached his destination. So Arjun isprompted, in the forty-fifth verse of Chapter 2, that since all the booksof the Ved provide illumination only within the limits of the three propertiesof nature, he should rise above them and liberate himself. In the verynext verse it is added that the worshiper has no need for the Ved afterfinal liberation just as a man has no need for a measly pond when thereis the infinite ocean all around him. There is also the suggestion herethat the one who goes beyond the Ved, by knowing God, is a Brahmin.So, although the usefulness of the Ved does come to an end forworshipers of the Brahmin stage, there is no doubt about their utility forothers. Lord Krishn proclaims in the twenty-eighth verse of Chapter 8that after having secured knowledge of the essence of God, the yogi

Yatharth Geeta 466
goes beyond the rewards of Vedic scriptural study, sacrificial rites,
penance, and charity, and thus attains to absolution. That also meansthat the Vedic scriptures endure and that performance of the ordainedyagya is incomplete so long as the ultimate state has not been achieved.As it is pointed out in Chapter 15, he who knows God, the root of theAshwath tree that the world is, is a knower of the Ved. That knowledge,however, can be had only by sitting devotedly at the feet of a noblesage-teacher. Rather than a book or seat of learning, the mode of worshipthat this mentor enjoins is the source-the spring-of that knowledge,although it cannot be denied that holy books and centers of formalinstruction are intended to steer one in the same direction.
OM:  Lord Krishn directs to chant the word OM and tells Arjun in the
eighth verse of Chapter 7: ?I am ... the sacred syllable OM.? In thefollowing chapter it is said: ?He who departs from the body intoning OM,God in word, and remembering me, attains to salvation.? (Verse 13).And he, too, Lord Krishn affirms in the seventeenth verse of Chapter 9,is ?the bearer and preserver of the whole world as also the giver ofrewards for action; father, mother, and also the grandsire; the sacred,imperishable OM who is worthy of being known; and all Ved- Rig, Sam,and Yajur.? In Chapter 10 he calls himself ?OM among words? and ?thevowel akar among the letters of the alphabet? the first sound of thesacred OM (verses 25 and 33). The twenty-third verse of Chapter 17declares that ?OM, Tat, and Sat are three epithets used for the SupremeBeing from whom at the outset there came forth Brahmin, the Ved, andyagya.? And in the very next verse it is added: ?It is hence that thedeeds of yagya, charity, and of penance, as ordained by scripture, arealways initiated by the devotees of Ved with a resonant utterance of thesyllable OM.? Lord Krishn?s final verdict is that recitation of OM is aprime necessity and that its proper mode has to be learnt by sittingdevotedly at the feet of some accomplished sage.
KNOWLEDGE PROPOUNDED BY THE GEETA IS PURE
MANUSMRITI:  Knowledge Propounded by the Geeta is Pure

Summary 467
Manusmriti: The Geeta was revealed even before the advent of king
Manu, the primordial human being. Lord Krishn says-  ?Arjun! I justrevealed this immortal yog to the Sun in the beginning of the era. Sunfurther revealed it to Manu. Manu after hearing it retained in his memory.?Things heard are stored in memory (smriti). The same was passed onto king Ikshwaku who further handed it over to the Rajrishi. Thereafterthis immortal yog disappeared from this world. In those days the traditionwas to store the knowledge received from the spoken words. Nobodycould imagine putting it in black and white. King Manu retained it in hismemory and thus started the tradition of retaining in memory. Thereforethis knowledge promulgated by the Geeta is true and pure Manusmriti.
If the Lord revealed this knowledge to the Sun prior to Manu, then
why do not we call it ?Surya Smriti?? Sun, in fact is that part of radiantGod from which human creation came into being. Lord Krishn says- ??Imyself am the father in the form of the conscious sentient seed andNature (prakriti) is the mother which conceives.?? Being a part of radianceof God, the Sun is the divine power which is the cause of constitutinghuman life. But the Sun is not any person. Further it is the same radiancewhich transmitted the knowledge or lore of the Geeta. This is theimplication of the expression- ??It was said to the Sun and the Sun saidit to Manu.?? For this reason this immortal yog itself is Manusmriti. Itshould be kept in mind that the Sun does not connote any person but itis the progenitor or the seed.
Lord Krishn says - Arjun! I intend to reveal or communicate to
that very primordial yog to you because you are my dear devotee,intimate friend. Arjun was intelligent and so genuinely eligible. He raiseda series of questions and counter-questions like- ?You are born in thepresent age and the Sun is so old existing since long long ago, so howdid you speak to the Sun. Under such conditions how can I believe thatyou yourself did say it to the Sun?? Thus he placed before him ten totwenty-five questions. But by reaching the concluding part of the Geeta,all his queries were exhausted. Thereafter the Lord himself raised suchquestions which Arjun could not do but they were in his interest and

Yatharth Geeta 468
hence himself gave the answer or solution to them. At last the Lord
said, ?Arjun! Did you listen to my discourses attentively? Has yourignorance born of attachments gone?? Arjun replied- ?Lord! myattachments are destroyed. I have regained my memory. I have notmerely heard but have retained it in my memory, and will now followyour instructions and fight.? He picked up the bow, the battle did takeplace, the victory was gained and a perfect empire of dharm wasestablished. Now the same original scripture of dharm, the Geeta againcame into circulation.
The Geeta is the initial scripture. It is the same Manusmriti which
Arjun retained in his memory. It is referred that only two notable workswere present before Manu - the Geeta which was communicated tohim, and the Ved which appeared before him. During those days therewas no system of writing as pen and paper were not known to people.So knowledge used to be received through hearing and retained inmemory. In this way the tradition of ?Shruti? and ?Smriti? prevailed thosedays. Manu Mahraj, who is the originator of human race honored theVed by calling it ?Shruti? and the Geeta the ?Smriti?.
The Ved descended before Manu, they are worth hearing and
should be heard but the Geeta is smriti, so we should always keep itfresh in our memory. This is a divine song which grants to every manthe eternal life, eternal peace and prosperity and a glorious way of living.
The Lord said - Arjun! If you do not listen to my precepts out of
arrogance you would be destroyed. So the implication is that overlookingor ignoring the precepts of the Geeta leads to destruction. In the lastverse of chapter 15, the Lord says- ??This scripture which is most occultamong all the occult things has been transmitted by me.?? After knowingthe quintessence of it Arjun (or anybody) would know all and wouldattain the summum bonum of life. In the last two verses of chapter 16he said- ??Ignoring this method of the scripture if some are spurred bydesire and fail to perform the worship, they are sure to lose happiness,prosperity and the Supreme State. So Arjun! This scripture stands as atouchstone to decide what is to be done and what is not to be done.

Summary 469
You studiously go through it and then act. You would dwell in me, you
will surely attain the immortal state, you will be blessed with an eternallife, with everlasting peace and prosperity.??
So the Geeta is the only true Manusmriti and Lord Krishn says
that it is the scripture. There is no other scripture, no other smriti. Lateron a number of so called smriti appeared in the society as a disastrousresult of the disappearance and forgetfulness of the Geeta. Many ofsuch smriti were written under the patronage of some kings or rulers forrunning the administration which raised the walls of distinction betweenthe high and the low in the society. In the so called manusmriti propagatedin the name of Manu has no portrayal of the age of Manu. The originalManusmriti which is the Geeta, holds that God is the only truth and it isattainable. Strangely enough the smriti, which are about 164 in number,do not even refer the name of God, not do they throw light on the waysof attaining God. They confine themselves up to the reservation ofplaces in heaven and thus promote that which does not exist - ?Na asti?.There is not even a single word about salvation (moksh).
THE ENLIGHTENED SAGE:  Sages are familiar with all kinds of
conduct - external and internal, practical and spiritual, and also of worldlyconduct and the ideal conduct enjoined by scriptures, for without suchcomprehensive knowledge they cannot frame laws to regulate sociallife and behaviour and a systematic order. Vashisth, Vishwamitra,Yogeshwar Krishn himself, Mahavir Swami, Mahatma Buddh, Moses,Jesus, Muhammad, Sant Ramdas, Dayanand, Guru Gobind Singh, andhundreds of other sages like them have done the same. But their social,worldly provisions are at best of a temporal nature. Bestowing materialbenefits on society is not a question of truth (Sanatan Dharm) becausephysical problems are here today and gone tomorrow. Thoughundoubtedly useful in a given time and situation, worldly dispensationsby sages are also, therefore, valid only for a limited period and as suchthey cannot be accepted as a timeless order.

Yatharth Geeta 470
THE LAW-GIVER:  Sages do operate as LAW-GIVERS and they
have rightly exerted themselves for the eradication of social evils. The
undertaking of worship of the Supreme Spirit in a spirit of discernmentand renunciation may not be possible if these evils are not eliminated.Apart from this, certain ?allurements? need to be provided in order todivert men, who are too engrossed in the world, to the state in whichthey can secure an awareness of truth. But the social order that sageshave envisaged to achieve this and the words they have employed toformulate this order do not constitute dharm. They only cater to people?sneeds for a century or two and are cited as precedents for a few centuriesmore, but they are certainly rendered lifeless with the emergence offresh exigencies over the span of a millennium or at most two. Thesword was an essential feature of the martial organization laid down byGuru Gobind Singh for the Sikhs. But what is the validity of carrying asword in the changed circumstances of today? Jesus rode asses andhe forbade his disciples to steal asses. But whatever he said of thesesimple creatures has been rendered irrelevant today because peoplearound the world now rarely use asses as a means of conveyance. Inthe same way Yogeshwar Krishn attempted to impose a certain orderon contemporary society according to the needs of the time, accountsof which are found in such works as the Mahabharat and the Bhagwat.Along with this, however, these works also portray the ultimate reality-the spiritual essence-from time to time. And we shall certainly fail tocomprehend both the social aspect and the truth if we mix up theordinance for the attainment of final liberation with the social provisions.Followers are sadly drawn more by the social, worldly provisions whichthey hasten to adopt not only as they are but in a much overdone form,and are ever ready to quote sages in defense of the social norms theyhave accepted. And they do not realize that in doing all this they are infact only distorting the righteous and true action that realized sageshave recommended, and turning it into so many forms of self-deception.Prejudices - born out of ignorance - have grown and persisted in respectof all holy books, be it the Ved, the Ramayan, the Mahabharat, the

Summary 471
Bible, or the Koran. The society which is based on the material world
thus, grasps only gross and crude meaning of these statements andaction recommonded by realized sages. For this very reason Lord Krishnseparated the portion of the Geeta, which grants eternal life, leads toeternal abode, and everlasting peace, from the portion of the instructionslaid down for the social, material order. The Mahabharat records thedetailed history and glorious culture of India. So he placed Geeta, thedivine song, in the middle of this grand and stupendous history, so thatthe future generations could correctly grasp its spiritual dimensions.Later on Maharishi Patanjali and a number of other sages separated hisedicts about the mode of attaining the Supreme Goal from the portionwhich delineated the social organizations or systems.
THE GEETA IS MEANT FOR THE WHOLE OF MANKIND:
The Lord delivered the teachings of the Geeta exactly at the time of theoutbreak of the warfare or the operations of weapons because he knewit well that there can never be peace and accord in the material world.Even after killing millions of people the victors are bound to be gloomyand feel themselves to be losers. So he presented a new kind of battlewhich goes on everlastingly through the teachings of the Geeta. If thisbattle is won a victory which is everlasting is attained and along with it,an imperishable abode is obtained which is ever accessible. Such battleis between the field (kshetr) and the knower of the field (kshetragya).The battle forever annihilates that which is inauspicious and thus itbecomes the means of realization of the Divine-Self.
This knowledge is the most secret knowledge-secret because it
is meant only for person of the required spiritual preparedness. So Arjunis at the end bidden that before he passes on this knowledge to anotherman he must wait, if the man is not a true devotee, until he is broughtover to the ordained way. Observance of such a precaution in theimparting of this most mysterious knowledge is essential, for thisknowledge is the one and only means of final salvation. And the Geetais a systematic account, in Lord Krishn's words, of this transcendentalknowledge.

Yatharth Geeta 472
THE PRESENT COMMENTARY: As for the present exposition, it
is called Yatharth Geeta because it is an attempt to elucidate the
meaning of Lord Krishn in its true perspective. Embodying the wholemeans of ultimate liberation, the Geeta is self-contained. There is not asingle point in it that may engender any doubt. But since it cannot begrasped on an intellectual plane, there may arise what only appear tobe doubts. So if we fail to comprehend any part of the Geeta, we canresolve our doubts as did Arjun by sitting devoutly by a sage who hasperceived and realized the essence.
leefÉefæ ØeefCeheelesve heefjØeMvesve mesJeÙee~
Gheos#Ùeefvle les %eeveb %eeefvevemleòJeoefMe&ve:~~ (Geeta, 4/34)
tadviddhi praàipÂtena paripraïnena sevayÂ |
upadekîyanti te jáÂnaØ jáÂninastattvadarïinaÉ || 4/34 ||
OM SHANTI !  SHANTI !!  SHANTI !!!

AN APPEAL
This ?Yatharth Geeta? is intended to provide you
with the noblest sermon made by Yogeshwar Shree
Krishn in the ?SHREEMADBHAGWADGEETA?: This
contains the portrayal, by a sage, after attainment, of
that Supreme Soul that abides within our hearts.
Attempting to use the Geeta with cynical
perspectives is to be avoided, lest we may be cheatedout of knowing our goals and the paths. By the devotedstudy of the Geeta, the entire human race stands to
succeed in their efforts to gain well-being. Even if they
comprehend only a small portion of it, they are certainto attain the ultimate beatitude, because any progress
made in this path, shall never be lost.
- Swami Adgadanand

The Mahabharat in View of The Indian Seers
THE MAHABHARAT
IN VIEW OF THE INDIAN SEERS
Scriptures were written by the Indian thinkers from two points of
view: first for keeping alive the glorious history so that people could
seek inspirations and follow the footsteps of their ancestors, to lead adignified and happy life and keep aloft their culture; secondly the spiritual
points of view, because they knew that mere happy material life would
not lead them to their ultimate welfare. They wished to convey thathuman life is simply  an interval between birth and death, simply a
halting place. So a happy, well managed worldly life would never bestow
ultimate well-being. For this very reason the thinkers and seers adoptedthe spiritual approach.
Every living being is under the governance of Maya (Illusion). To
liberate him from the clutches of Maya and place him on the authentic,solid ground of the soul, to awaken his dormant spirit so that he might
cover the distance from God, the Supreme Element, to enable him to
perceive the Supreme Being through the divine touch, is the soleobjective of the Spiritual path and this is known as Bhakti (devotion).
Only in it lies the eternal welfare of the living beings. Lord Krishn said,
??Arjun! Neither through the Veda, nor through Yagya, nor throughofferings, nor through penance, I can be attained. I can be attained only
through total Bhakti (devotion) depending on none else except Me.??-
bhaktyÂ tvananyayÂ ïakya ahamevaØvidho'rjuna |
jáÂtuØ draîòuØ ca tattvena praveîòuØ ca parantapa ||   (Geeta, 11/54)
Lord Krishn says to Arjun, ??Only through Bhakti I can be directly
realized as you have realized and perceived Me. I am accessible through

The Mahabharat in View of The Indian Seers
it.?? Thus the prime aim of Indian thought is to enable the tormented,
agonized living beings to attain the spiritual Supreme Goal and the
immortal state of total indivisible bliss.
Wars in the world have always been there, be it the war of
Mahabharat or the battle between Ram and Ravan or the battles andwars described in the mythological scripture. The sages and seers
presented these incidents in the light of the two points of view discussedabove. They have been presenting the inherent essence of the Vedic
lore through the examples of these famous historical events.
Undoubtedly the terrible war of the Mahabharat was fought but
Lord Krishn - the hero of this war - knew it well that even the victors of
this war were not destined to enjoy the fruits of it. So he described it asan internal spiritual war which assumes eternal victory, which bestows
immortal life, which provides everlasting peace and which never gives
way to any kind of disorder. He presented the outer war in spiritual andphilosophical terms. For this he presented the Geeta, a spiritual scripture.
By taking up therein characters like Arjun and others as symbols of the
inner potentialities of each person, Lord Krishn described the inner warof the mind and heart. Thereby he opened the locked doors of our
possibilities of realizing and attaining the ultimate truth.
There are two kinds of thoughts or mode of thinking. One is divine,
which leads to the Supreme Being and eliminates the distance from
God by true perception, by the touch of the divinity and which disappearsafter providing the merger in God. The second kind of thought is demonic
which leads to groping and stumbling in the dark world of ignorance.
The endless cycles of birth and death are caused by it, leading tosufferings after sufferings, but never reaching to any destinations. The
Geeta presents a systematic method which pulls out living beings from
meaningless wanderings and ramblings and provides the immortal stateof peace.

The Mahabharat in View of The Indian Seers
Mad after wealth and pompous material life, people do not
understand the truth despite lots of teachings and preachings. Even
after staking everything in order for obtaining victory, people at last
come to realize that it all was but a demeaning deception, a fruitlessendeavour. At such crucial point men become capable of grasping the
Truth. The same happened with Yudhisthir - the victor of the war of
Mahabharat. After the end of the war he ruled for thirty-six years but hiseyes were always filled with shedding tears. One day he came to learn
that Lord Krishn had finally departed from this world, he rose up from
the throne and silently moved towards the Himalayas.
Yuyutsu, a brother of Duryodhan, at the beginning of the war came
to Yudhisthir saying, ??Brother, Dharm (justice) is in your favour, so Iwill fight from your side.?? Yudhisthir replied, ??Why should you fight!You are intelligent, so you look after the management of the camps.??
Even after the end of the war he was alive. When he saw Yudhisthir
leaving, renouncing all, he said, ??Brother! Where are you going??? There
was no reply. So he again said to him, ??Who would occupy this jewel-
studded throne??? Yudhisthir said, ??Now you occupy it.?? He retorted, ??Ido not need it.?? Yudhisthir then remorsefully said, ??For this very throne
six thousand million of great warriors laid down their lives. You sit on
this throne which is placed over the river of blood and you too taste thejoy of it.?? Yuyutsu aptly replied that he in no way at any cost would like
to have it.
Yudhisthir replied that, ??He would have been happier if he would
have occupied it. If he did not want it, he should search Parikshit andtell him about it. He would now no more weep for that which was mortal.??
Saying so Yudhisthir moved towards the Himalayas along with hisbrothers and Draupadi to follow the path of the Geeta and attainment
throughout their remaining life. He picked up the path which awards
eternal victory. The Geeta is the methodical way of the worship of God.

The Mahabharat in View of The Indian Seers
No doubt the war of Mahabharat did take place but it was simply
a temporary event. But the Geeta has preached about a life which would
last forever. It is a spiritual scripture. The Lord has himself proclaimed
it to be a scripture;
?iti guhyatamaØ ïÂstramidamuktaØ mayÂnagha |  ? (Geeta, 15/20)
??Arjun! This most occult scripture has been revealed by Me. He
who would obey it, would be dearest to Me.?? ?Yatharth Geeta? is the
exact commentary of it. You are all advised to go through it and attain
the Supreme Goal of life.
!! OM !!

PREFACE OF EACH CHAPTER IN AUDIO CDs  OR  MP3s
1.The GEETA, a complete message in itself, of reverence and
dedication to one Supreme Spirit, is an open invitation for sacredness
to all. Whether rich or poor, of noble birth or unknown parentage, a
virtuous person or a sinner, a woman or a man, chaste or extremelysinful, residing anywhere in the universe all are entitled to gain
entry in it. The Geeta specifically stresses on the upliftment of these
embroiled or caught up in the bondage of worldly affairs towards anennobling and liberating spiritual path, whereas those who are
virtuous are already engaged in the ordained action and meditation.
That precious and universal teaching is presented herein.
2.Scriptures are created with two main objectives. One is to protect
the social order and the culture, in which the people could follow
the footsteps of their noble ancestors. The second is to ensure thatpeople can gain ultimate, eternal peace.
Such scriptures as the Ramayan, the Bible, the Koran, and so
on, deal with both these aspects. But, because of the materialviewpoints held by most people, they tend to adhere only to those
that are of immediate social use. In the spiritual texts, also, we find
many references to useful social practices, confirming their relevance.Therefore, Sage Ved Vyas, while writing the Mahabharat, the epic
within which the Geeta is an inherent part, had clearly referred to
social as well as spiritual matters. However, in the Geeta itself,there is not a single verse that is concerned with the sustenance of
physical life or the propagation of social or religious conventions,
rites or customs. This was done to ensure that people should notmix up dogmas into something, which is meant for universal and
timeless well-being. This divine Geeta is presented exclusively in
terms of timeless spiritual roots and concepts.
3.The Geeta was never intended for any specific individual, any specific
caste, religion, path, place, time or for any conventional culture. It

is a universal and eternal spiritual treatise. It is enduringly and most
relevant to every nation, every religion, every living being. Indeed,
it is meant for everyone, everywhere. The Geeta is a scripture that
is meant for the entire human race for use as a spiritual textbook.
It becomes then for each of us a great honour and blessing that
this Geeta can be our own personal, spiritual handbook.
4.The most venerable Bhagwan Mahavir, the founder of the Jainreligion, as well as his contemporary Bhagwan Buddh, both of
whom were completely God-realized, each in their separate teachings
reflected the essential message of the Geeta to the people in folklanguages.
?The Soul alone is the truth, and Self-realization may be attained
with total restraining of the mind and senses.? This is the essentialmessage conveyed by the Geeta.
When Lord Buddh stated that the same essence alone is universal
and eternal, he reinforced this essential teaching of the Geeta.
Not only such a teaching from Lord Buddh, but whatever essence
has been professed as universal teachings in the name of religion,or spirituality anywhere and all times such as One Universal God,
Prayer, Repentance, Penance and so on, are all teachings found to
be contained within the Geeta itself, the original seed scripture ofmankind. Here, then, in ?YATHARTH GEETA?, these same lessons,
coming straight from the spoken words of Swami Shree Adgadanand,
are being presented to the world at large in the form of audio CDsor MP3s, so that the whole human race can benefit from this universal
wisdom.
5.Among the folktales of India, there is a story that Aristotle- one of
the great Greek philosopher and men of wisdom like Socrates had
instructed Alexander the Great to bring back with him from India, a
country that was well-known for its spiritual masters, a copy of the?Shreemadbhagwadgeeta? as the guru-like embodiment of the
spiritual knowledge of these accomplished sages.

The essential concept of one single God as the Ultimate Reality
taught in the GEETA, has been propagated in different languages at
different times around the world by such great masters as Moses,Jesus and numerous Sufi Saints also. Due to language and cultural
differences, it can appear that the teachings of these great masters
are differentiated- but indeed, their essence is identical to the wisdomconveyed by Lord Krishn to Arjun in the GEETA. As such the
GEETA is indisputably a spiritual textbook for the entire human
race.
By presenting the essence of ?YATHARTH GEETA?, Swami
Adgadanand Ji has made an invaluable contribution to all of mankind.The transformation of this text into the form of audio CDs or MP3shas been done by the courtesy of a number of devotees.
6.Every religion all over the world, can be seen as the distant echo ofthe ?Shreemadbhagwadgeeta?. By listening to the lessons conveyedby Swami Shree Adgadanand Ji in the ?YATHARTH GEETA?, the
devotees decided that those lessons must be made popular through
audio CDs or MP3s. Such a decision came out of a realization thatthe essence of the GEETA?s teachings has found its place within
the lessons taught by accomplished teachers throughout history such
as Mahavir, Gautam Buddh, Nanak, Kabir and others. These CDsor MP3s of the Geeta are being presented for Self-realisation for
seekers everywhere.
7.At the time when the Geeta originated, thousands of years ago,
mankind did not learn to identify itself through the separate, different
religions, which evolved subsequently, but rather through such
universally agreed upon sacred scripture and holy books such as theVed and the Upanishad in India. In those days, there was only one
spiritual treatise that was acknowledged as containing the essence
of all Ved and Upanishad i.e. the SHREEMADBHAGWADGEETA.

In this sense, the Geeta is an essential treatise- that is, one containing
the essence- for gaining deliverance and prosperity.
When compared to reading scripture for learning, it is always
more profitable to listen to it. Because of the clear pronunciation
and intonation, listening to the spoken text lends itself to betterconcentration and comprehension. This is the essential purpose
behind presenting the ?Yatharth Geeta?, the Geeta in its True
Perspective, through audio CDs or MP3s.
By listening to these audio CDs or MP3s, even our children
can benefit by absorbing the noble culture of the Supreme Being.The atmosphere surrounding each of our own households shallreverberate with the spiritual echo of the ?Bhagwadgeeta?, the
?Celestial Song?, like a sacred grove.
8.That home where God is not being discussed is a cemetery. In
today?s world- even though they do have some inclination towards
Self-realization in the Supreme Spirit, most people feel themselves
unable to take time out to perform worship and meditation. In sucha situation, if the message of the Geeta can reach out to every nook
and corner of the world, it shall sow the seeds for universal well-
being, peace, and prosperity. The divine words of God shall, throughthese CDs or MP3s, deliver the divine message of God contained in
the ?Bhagwadgeeta?, which translates in English as the ?Song of
God? or the ?Song Celestial?. And this is the very essence of aworshipful foundation for the liberation and ultimate happiness of
all beings.
9.We make sure that our children are well educated so that they shall
be inculcated with noble culture. People tend to believe that noble
culture is that which shall ensure a decent livelihood and help to
solve the problems of daily living. Very few, hardly anyone, hastheir attention turned towards God. Many people even have sufficient
material wealth that they perceive no need at all for calling upon

God (as does the noble Arjun in the Geeta to his friend and charioteer,
the accomplished sage Krishn). In the end, though, all material wealth
and seeming security is perishable. At the time of death, even though
they were attached to those things, people still have to leave thembehind. Given this undisputed reality, the only path open to any of
us is to understand during our lifetime, while we are still in our
body, the ways to move towards the Supreme Being. This is theessential purpose that is being transmitted through these audio CDs
or MP3s of the ?Yatharth Geeta?.
10.Whatever religions and religious sects exist in this world, were allformed in the name of some enlightened soul by some group of
dedicated followers. The secluded spots that the noble sage hadchosen for his meditation in the later years, have now become
pilgrimage centres, ashrams, monasteries, temples and churches,
where in the name of those sages and for earning their living, peopleengage themselves in various functions and practices, ranging fromsimple livelihood to extreme luxury. Accomplished sages are always
put on a pedestal, but no one can attain the stage of accomplishment
simply by putting themselves on a pedestal or being put there bydevotees. That is the reason, that dharm has always been the field of
an authentic realised sage, a true, accomplished teacher.
The GEETA, the ?Song Celestial? in Sir Edwin Arnold?s
translation, is undoubtedly a scripture. It is the actual teaching ofthe Supreme Spirit as manifested through the personage of
Yogeshwar Lord Shree Krishn, a realized sage and enlightenedteacher. These eternal truths and the true essence of the same sacred
verses of the timeless dialogue between the accomplished teacher,
Lord Krishn, and the devoted and noble-hearted spiritual seeker,Arjun, are being relayed to you in their pure form and innate clarity
through these audio CD's or MP3s of the ?Yatharth Geeta?.
|| OM ||

 
The Geeta contains a 
complete description of the 
dynamic meditational system 
of the research that gives 
attainment to the Self, which 
is the complete spirituality of 
India and also the basic 
source of the prevailing 
religions of the whole world. 
It furthe r concludes that the 
Supreme Being is one, the 
action to attain is one, the 
grace is one and the result, 
too is one - and that is the 
vision of the Supreme Being, 
attainment of godliness and 
eternal life.  
 
- Refer ?Yatharth Geeta?.  

 